AC 43.13-1B  Appendix 1: Glossary

The following words and terms represent some
field of aviation. For a more complete list of
consult an aviation dictionary.
abrasion resistant PTFE  a solid insulation wall of
PTFE with hard, nonconductive grit positioned midway in the wall thickness, and significantly improves
the resistance of the PTFE material to damage from
wear.
acetylene—gas composed of two parts of carbon
and two parts of hydrogen. When burned in the
atmosphere of oxygen, it produces one of the highest flame temperatures obtainable.
acetylene regulator—manually adjustable device
used to reduce cylinder pressure to torch pressure
and to keep the pressure constant. They are never
to be used as oxygen regulators.
adherend—one of the members being bonded together by adhesive.
Airworthiness Directive  a regulation issued by
the FAA that applies to aircraft, aircraft engines,
propellers, or appliances, when an unsafe condition
exists and that condition is likely to exist or develop
in other products of the same type design.
airworthy—is when an aircraft or one of its component parts meets its type design and is in a condition for safe operation.
ambient light—the visible light level measured at
the surface of the part.
ampere (A)  the basic unit of current flow. One A
is the amount of current that flows when a difference of potential of 1 V is applied to a circuit with a
resistance of 1 Ω. One coulomb per second.
antenna  a device designed to radiate or intercept
electromagnetic waves.
anti-tear strips—strips of fabric of the same material as the airplane is covered with, laid over the
wing rib under the reinforcing tape.
apparent power—the product of volts and amperes in AC circuits where the current and voltage
are out of phase.
appliance  any instrument, mechanism, equipment, part, apparatus, appurtenance, or accessory,
including communications equipment, that is used
of those that are often encountered in the
definitions, a mechanic or technician should
or intended to be used in operating or controlling
an aircraft in flight, is installed in or attached to the
aircraft, and is not part of an airframe, engine or
propeller.
arm  a measurement of distance, in inches, feet,
etc., used in weight and balance calculations.
Normally only the longitudinal arm is of practical
importance. The three axial arms are longitudinal
arm, lateral arm, and vertical arm.
automatic direction finder (ADF)  a radio receiver utilizing a directional loop antenna that enables the receiver to indicate the direction from
which a radio signal is being received; also called a
radio compass.
automatic flight control system (AFCS)  a flight
control system incorporating an automatic pilot with
additional systems such as a VOR coupler, an ILS
approach coupler, and an internal navigation system that is fully automatic, so the aircraft can be
flown in a completely automatic mode.
avionics  the science and technology of electronics as applied to aviation.
azimuth  angular distance measured on a horizontal circle in a clockwise direction from either
north or south.
balance  the condition of stability which exists in
an aircraft when all weight and forces are acting in
such a way as to prevent rotation about an axis or
pivot point.
base metal—the metal to be welded, brazed, soldered, or cut.
black light—electromagnetic radiation in the near
ultraviolet range of wavelength.
blade station—is a reference position on a blade
that is a specified distance from the center of the
hub.
bond—the adhesion of one surface to another,
with or without the use of an adhesive as a bonding
agent.
bonding—a general term applied to the process of
electrically connecting two or more conductive objects. In aircraft, the purpose of bonding (except as
applied to individual connections in the wiring and
grounding systems) is to provide conductive paths
for electric currents. This is accomplished by providing suitable low-impedance connections joining
conductive aircraft components and the aircraft
structure. Another purpose of bonding is to ensure
the safe passage of current caused by lightning or
static electricity through the aircraft structure.
borescope—a long, tubular optical instrument designed for remote visual inspection of surfaces.
brashness—a condition of wood characterized by
low resistance to shock and by an abrupt failure
across the grain without splintering.
braze welding—a welding process variation in
which a filler metal, having a liquidus above 450 °C
(840 °F) and below the solidus of the base metal is
used. Unlike brazing, in braze welding the filler
metal is not distributed in the joint by capillary action.
brazing—the joining of two pieces of metal by wetting their surface with molten alloy of copper, zinc,
or tin.
bus or bus bar—solid copper strips to carry current between primary and secondary circuits; also
used as jumpers.
butt joint—a joint between two members aligned
approximately in the same plane.
butyrate dope—a finish for aircraft fabric consisting of a film base of cellulose fibers dissolved in
solvents with the necessary plasticizers, solvent,
and thinners.
cable—(electrical)  assembly of one or more conductors within an enveloping protective sheath so
constructed as to permit use of conductors separately or in a group.
calibration  a set of operations, performed in accordance with a definite document procedure,
which compares the measurements performed by
an instrument or standard, for the purpose of detecting and reporting, or eliminating by adjustment,
errors in the instrument tested.
center of gravity  that point about which the aircraft would balance if suspended. For field weight
and balance purposes/control, the center of gravity
is normally calculated only along its longitudinal
axis (nose to tail), disregarding both the lateral and
vertical location.
certification—implies that a certificate is in existence which certifies or states a qualification.
check—a lengthwise separation of the wood, the
greater part of which occurs across the rings of annual growth.
chemical conversion coating (Specification
MIL-C-81706)—is a chemical surface treatment
used on aluminum alloys to inhibit corrosion and to
provide a proper surface for paint finishing.
chord  an imaginary straight line joining the leading
and trailing edges of an airfoil.
circuit—a closed path or mesh of closed paths
usually including a source of EMF.
circuit breaker  a protective device for opening a
circuit automatically when excessive current is
flowing through it.
close-grained wood—wood with narrow and inconspicuous annual rings. The term is sometimes
used to designate wood having small and closelyspaced pores, but in this sense the term “finetextured” is more often used.
coil shot—production of longitudinal magnetization
accomplished by passing current through a coil encircling the part being inspected.
compass  a device used to determine direction
on the Earth’s surface. A magnetic compass utilizes the Earth’s magnetic field to establish direction.
compression wood—identified by its relatively
wide annual rings, usually eccentric, and its relatively large amount of summer wood, usually more
than 50 percent of the width of the annual rings in
which it occurs. Compression wood shrinks excessively lengthwise as compared with normal
wood.
conductor  a wire or other material suitable for
conducting electricity.
conduit  a rigid metallic or nonmetallic casing, or
a flexible metallic casing covered with a woven
braid or synthetic rubber used to encase electrical
cables.
contact  electrical connectors in a switch, solenoid or relay that controls the flow of current.
control panel  an upright panel, open or closed,
where switches, rheostats, meters, etc., are installed for the control and protection of electrical
machinery.
corrosion—the electrochemical deterioration of a
metal resulting from chemical reaction to the surrounding environment.
crack—is a partial separation of material caused
by vibration, overloading, internal stresses, nicks,
defective assemblies, fatigue, or rapid changes in
temperature.
creepage—is the conducting of electrical current
along a surface between two points at different potentials. The current’s ability to pass between two
points increases with higher voltage and when deposits of moisture or other conductive materials exist on the surfaces.
cross grain—grain not parallel with the axis of a
piece. It may be either diagonal or spiral grain or a
combination of the two.
cross coat—a double coat of dope or paint. It is
sprayed on in one direction, and then immediately
after the solvent flash-off, it is sprayed at right angles to the first coat.
cure  to change the properties of a thermosetting
resin irreversibly by vulcanization or chemical reaction. May be accomplished by the addition of curing
(cross-linking) agents, with or without a catalyst, and
with or without heat or pressure.
curing temperature  temperature to which a resin
or an assembly is subjected in order to cure the
resin.
cutting torch—a device used in gas cutting of
metals.
damping  limiting the duration of vibration by either electrical or mechanical means.
data  information that supports and/or describes
the original aircraft design, alteration or repair including the following: (1) drawings, sketches, and or photographs; (2) engineering analysis; (3) engineering
orders; and (4) operating limitations.
datum  imaginary vertical plane from which all horizontal measurements are made or indicated when
the aircraft is in level flight attitude.
derating—is a technique whereby a part is
stressed in actual usage at values well below the
manufacturer’s rating for the part. By decreasing
mechanical, thermal, and electrical stresses, the
probability of degradation or catastrophic failure is
lessened.
direct current electrode negative—the arrangement of direct current arc welding leads in which
the work is the positive pole and the electrode is
the negative pole of the welding arc.
direct current electrode positive—the arrangement of direct current arc welding leads in which
the work is the negative pole and the electrode is
the positive pole of the welding arc.
discontinuity—an interruption in the normal physical structure or configuration of a part, such as a
crack, lap, seam, inclusion, or porosity.
distal tip—the tip, lens end, of a borescope.
dope—liquid applied to fabric to tauten it by shrinking, strengthen it, and render it airtight by acting as
a filler.
Dope-proofing—protecting a surface from the
chemicals and chafing qualities of dope and doped
fabrics.
drape—the ability of tape and broad goods to conform to a contoured shape.
drip loop  a bundle installation method used to
prevent water or other fluid contaminants from running down the wiring into a connector.
dry rot—a term loosely applied to many types of
wood decay but especially to that which, when in
an advanced stage, permits the wood to be easily
crushed to a dry powder. The term is actually a
misnomer for any decay, since all fungi require
considerable moisture for growth.
dwell time—the total time that a penetrant, emulsifier (or remover), or developer remains on the surface of the test part.
dye penetrant inspection—an inspection method
for surface cracks in which a penetrating dye is allowed to enter any cracks present and is pulled out
of the crack by an absorbent developer. A crack
appears as a line on the surface of the developer.
edge grain—edge-grain lumber has been sawed
parallel with the pith of the log and approximately at
right angles to the growth rings; that is, the rings
form an angle of 45 degrees or more with the surface of the piece.
electricity—one of the fundamental quantities in
nature consisting of elementary particles, electrons
and protons, which are manifested as a force of attraction or repulsion, and also in work that can be
performed when electrons are caused to move; a
material agency which, when in motion, exhibits
magnetic, chemical, and thermal effects, and when
at rest is accompanied by an interplay of forces between associated localities in which it is present.
electromagnet—temporary magnet which is magnetized by sending current through a coil of wire
wound around an iron core.
Electromagnetic/Radio Frequency Interference
(EMI/RFI)—frequency spectrum of electromagnetic
radiation extending from subsonic frequency to
X-rays. This term should not be used in place of
the term Radio Frequency Interference (RFI). (See
radio frequency interference.) Shielding materials
for the entire EMI spectrum are not readily available.
electromotive force (EMF)—difference of electrical potential measured in volts.
electron—a negative charge that revolves around
the nucleus of an atom; a unit of a negative electrical charge.
electronics—general term that describes the
branch of electrical science and technology that
treats the behavior and effects of electron emission
and transmission.
electron Volt (eV)—a unit of energy equal to the
energy aquired by an electron falling though potential differences of one volt, approximately
1.602X 10-19 joule.
emulsion-type cleaner—a chemical cleaner which
mixes with water or petroleum solvent to form an
emulsion (a mixture which will separate if allowed
to stand). It is used to loosen dirt, soot, or oxide
films from the surface of an aircraft.
epoxy—one of various usually thermosetting resins capable of forming tight cross-linked polymer
structures marked by toughness, strong adhesion,
high corrosion, and chemical resistance, used especially in adhesives and surface coating.
epoxy primer—a two-part catalyzed material used
to provide a good bond between a surface and a
surface coating.
epoxy resin—a common thermosetting resin
which exhibits exceptionally good adhesion, low
cure shrinkage, and low water-absorption properties.
erosion—loss of metal from metal surfaces by the
action of small particles such as sand or water.
ETFE  (Frequently referred to by the trade name,
TEFZEL) a copolymer of PTFE and polyethylene.
exciter—small generator for supplying direct current to the alternator’s field windings.
exfoliation corrosion—a form of intergranular
corrosion that attacks extruded metals along their
layer-like grain structure.
expandable sleeving—open-weave braided
sleeving used to protect wire and cables from
abrasion and other hazards (commonly known by
trade name EXPANDO).
FEP—fluorinated ethylene propylene (commonly
known by the trade name, TEFLON). A melt extrudable fluorocarbon resin, very similar in appearance and performance to PTFE, but with a maximum temperature rating of 200 °C.
ferrous metal—iron, or any alloy containing iron.
fiberglass  the most common material used to reinforce structures in home-built and experimental
aircraft. Available as mat, roving, fabric, etc. It is incorporated into both thermoset and thermoplastic
resins. The glass fibers increase mechanical
strength, impact resistance, stiffness, and dimensional stability of the matrix.
fill  threads in a fabric that run crosswise of the
woven material.
filiform corrosion—a thread, or filament-like corrosion which forms on aluminum skins beneath the
finish.
finish—external coating or covering of an aircraft
or part.
flat grain—lumber has been sawed parallel with
the pith of the log and approximately tangent to the
growth rings; that is, the rings form an angle of less
than 45 degrees with the surface of the piece.
fluorescent—a substance is said to be fluorescent
when it will glow or fluoresce when excited by ultraviolet light. Some types of dye-penetrant material
use fluorescent dyes which are pulled from the
cracks by a developer and observed under “black”
ultraviolet light.
flux—materials used to prevent, dissolve, or facilitate removal of oxides and other undesirable surface substances. Also, the name for magnetic
fields.
fretting corrosion—corrosion damage between
close-fitting parts which are allowed to rub together. The rubbing prevents the formation of protective oxide films and allows the metals to corrode.
fuse—a protective device containing a special wire
that melts when current exceeds the rated value for
a definite period.
functional check  this test may require the use of
appropriate test equipment.
galvanic corrosion—corrosion due to the presence of dissimilar metals in contact with each
other.
gas cylinder—a portable container used for transportation and storage of a compressed gas.
gas tungsten arc welding—(GTAW) an arc welding process which produces coalescence of metals
by heating them with an arc between a tungsten
(nonconsumable) electrode and the work. Shielding is obtained from a gas or gas mixture. Pressure may or may not be used and filler metal may
or may not be used.
generator—a device for converting mechanical
energy into electrical energy.
global positioning system (GPS)  a navigation
system that employs satellite transmitted signals to
determine the aircraft’s location.
grain—the direction, size, arrangement, appearance, or quality of the fibers in wood or metal.
grain - diagonal—annual rings in wood at an angle with the axis of a piece as a result of sawing at
an angle with the bark of the tree.
grommet—an insulating washer that protects the
sides of holes through which wires must pass/or a
metal or plastic drain attached to fabric on aircraft.
gross weight   the total weight of the aircraft
including its contents.
grounding—the term is usually applied to a particular form of bonding that is the process of electrically connecting conductive objects to either conductive structure or some other conductive return
path for the purpose of safely completing either a
normal or fault circuit.
harness—a cable harness is a group of cables or
wires securely tied as a unit.
honeycomb  manufactured product consisting of a
resin-impregnated sheet or metal material which has
been corrugated or expanded into hexagon-shaped
and other structural-shaped cells. Primarily used as
core material for sandwich constructions.
inductance (L)  the ability of a coil or conductor to
oppose a change in current flow.
insulator  a material that will not conduct current
to an appreciable degree.
integrated circuit  small, complete circuit built up
by vacuum deposition and other techniques, usually on a silicon chip, and mounted in a suitable
package.
intergranular corrosion—the formation of corrosion along the grain boundaries within a metal alloy.
interlocked-grained wood—wood in which the fibers are inclined in one direction in a number of
rings of annual growth, then gradually reverse and
are inclined in an opposite direction in succeeding
growth rings, then reverse again.
inverter—a device for converting direct current to
alternating current.
laminate  a product obtained by bonding two or
more laminae of the same material or of different
materials.
laminated wood—a piece of wood built up of plies
or laminations that have been joined either with
glue or with mechanical fastenings. The term is
most frequently applied where the plies are too
thick to be classified as veneer and when the grain
of all plies is parallel.
leakage field—the magnetic field forced out into
the air by the distortion of the field within a part,
caused by the presence of a discontinuity or
change in section configuration.
linter  the short fiber left on the cotton seed after
ginning.
localizer  that section of an ILS that produces the
directional reference beam.
LORAN (Long-Range Navigation)  a radio navigation system utilizing master and slave stations
transmitting timed pulses. The time difference in
reception of pulses from several stations establishes a hyperbolic line of position that may be
identified on a LORAN chart. By utilizing signals
from two pairs of stations, a fix in position is obtained.
magnetic field—the space around a source of
magnetic flux in which the effects of magnetism
can be determined.
marker beacon  a radio navigation aid used in an
instrument approach to identify distance to the
runway. As the aircraft crosses over the markerbeacon transmitter, the pilot receives an accurate
indication of the airplane’s distance from the runway through the medium of a flashing light and an
aural signal.
master switch  a switch designed to control all
electric power to all circuits in a system.
moisture content of wood—weight of the water
contained in the wood usually expressed in percentage of the weight of the kiln-dry wood.
multiconductor cable—consists of two or more
cables or wires, all of which are encased in an
outer covering composed of synthetic rubber, fabric, or other material.
nick—a sharp notch-like displacement of metal
surface.
nomex braid  NOMEX is the trade name for a
high-temperature polyamide thread that is braided
over the larger sizes (# 8 gage and larger) of many
of the military specification wires. It can be encountered in either an off-white or black/green color.
normalizing—reforming of the grain structure of a
metal or alloy by proper heat treatment to relieve
internal stresses.
open circuit  an incomplete or broken electrical
circuit.
open-grained wood—common classification of
painters for woods with large pores, such as oak,
ash, chestnut, and walnut. Also known as “coarsetextured.”
operational check  this is an operational test to
determine whether a system or component is functioning properly in all aspects in conformance with
minimum acceptable manufacture design
specifications.
optical fiber  any filament or fiber made of dielectric materials that guides light whether or not it is
used to transmit signals.
rifice—opening through which gas or air flows. It
is usually the final opening controlled by a valve.
oxidizing—combining oxygen with any other substance. For example, a metal is oxidized when the
metal is burned, i.e., oxygen is combined with all
the metal or parts of it
oxidizing flame—an oxy-fuel gas flame having an
oxidizing effect due to excess oxygen.
oxygen cutting—cutting metal using the oxygen
jet which is added to an oxygen-acetylene flame.
oxygen regulator—manually-adjustable device
used to reduce cylinder pressure to torch pressure
and to keep the pressure constant. They are never
to be used as fuel gas regulators.
peel ply—a layer of resin-free material used to protect a laminate for later secondary bonding (sometimes referred to as a release film).
pickling—the treatment of a metal surface by an
acid to remove surface corrosion.
pitch—is the distance, in inches, that a propeller
section will move forward in one revolution, or the
distance a nut will advance in one revolution of the
screw in a single thread.
pitch distribution—is the gradual twist in the propeller blade from shank to tip.
pitted—small irregular shaped cavities in the surface of the parent material usually caused by corrosion, chipping, or heavy electrical discharge.
pitting—the formation of pockets of corrosion
products on the surface of a metal.
plastic  an organic substance of large molecular
weight which is solid in its finished state and, at
some stage during its manufacture or its processing
into a finished article, can be shaped by flow.
polyester braid  a plastic braiding thread, when
used as the outer surface of a wire, provides a clothlike appearance.
polyimide tape  a plastic film (commonly referred
to by the trade name, KAPTON). The tape has a
dark brown color, and is frequently coated with a
polyimide varnish that has a very distinct mustard
yellow color. At times, the spiral edge of the outermost tape is apparent under the varnish topcoat. It
may be used for wire insulation. Total polyimide tape
insulated wire constructions are inactive for new design on military aircraft and are subject to the procedures defined in FAA Advisory Circular AC 29-2A
Change 2 Paragraph 29.1359 in Civil Aircraft.
polyimide varnish  a liquid form of polyimide that
is applied to the outer surface of a wire through the
process of repeated dipping through the varnish
bath with subsequent heat curing. The successive
layers rarely reach a total buildup of 1 mil.
polymerization—basic processes for making large
(high-polymer) molecules from small ones, normally without chemical change; can be by addition,
condensation, rearrangement, or other methods.
porosity—cavity-type discontinuities in metal
formed by gas entrapment during solidification.
prepreg—a mat, a fabric, or covering impregnated
with resin that is ready for lay up and curing.
propeller—is a rotating airfoil that consists of two
or more blades attached to a central hub which is
mounted on the engine crankshaft.
protractor—is a device for measuring angles.
PTFE Tape (Insulation)  polytetrafluoroethylene
tape (commonly known by the trade name, TEFLON), wrapped around a conductor and then centered with heat, fusing the layers into a virtually homogeneous mass. It is used both as a primary insulation against the conductor, and as an outer layer or
jacket over a shield. Maximum temperature rating is
260 °C.
PVF Polyvinylidine Fluoride  a fluorocarbon
2
plastic, that when used in aircraft wire, is invariably
radiation cross-linked and employed as the outer
layer.
radar (radio detecting and ranging)  radio
equipment that utilizes reflected pulse signals to locate and determine the distance to any reflecting
object within its range.
radome  a nonmetallic cover used to protect the
antenna assembly of a radar system.
rectifier—a device for converting alternating current to direct current.
reinforcing tape—a narrow woven cotton or polyester tape used over aircraft fabric to reinforce it at
the stitching attachments.
relay  an electrically-operated remote-control
switch.
resin—vast profusion of natural and increasingly,
synthetic materials used as adhesives, fillers, binders and for insulation.
resistance  the opposition a device or material offers to the flow or current.
resonance method (ringing) of ultrasonic inspection—a method of detecting material thickness or indications of internal damage by injecting
variable frequency ultrasonic energy into a material. A specific frequency of energy will produce the
clearest indication of damage in a given thickness
of material. When the equipment is calibrated for a
specific thickness, and this thickness changes, an
aural or visual alert is given.
resonant frequency—the frequency of a source of
vibration that is exactly the same as the natural
vibration frequency of the structure.
resonate—a mechanical system is said to resonate when its natural vibration frequency is exactly
the same as the frequency of the force applied.
When an object resonates at a particular frequency, the amplitude in its vibration will increase
immensely as that frequency is reached and will be
less on either side of that frequency.
rib—part of primary structure, whose purpose is to
maintain profile of airfoil and support fabric or thin
wood covering.
sacrificial corrosion—a method of corrosion protection in which a surface is plated with a metal
less noble than itself. Any corrosion will attack the
plating rather than the base metal.
sandwich construction  a structural panel concept consisting in its simplest form of two relatively
thin, parallel sheets (face sheets) of structural material bonded to and separated by a relatively thick,
lightweight core. High strength-to-weight ratios are
obtained with sandwiched materials.
scarf joint—a joint made by cutting away similar
angular segments of two adherents and bonding
the adherents with cut areas fitted together.
score—a surface tear or break on a surface that
has a depth and length ranging between a scratch
and a gouge.
scratch—a superficial small cut on a surface.
semiconductor device  any device based on either preferred conduction through a solid in one direction, as in rectifiers; or on a variation in conduction characteristics through a partially conductive
material, as in a transistor.
severe wind and moisture problem (SWAMP)
areas  areas such as wheel wells, wing folds, and
near wing flaps, and areas directly exposed to extended weather conditions are considered SWAMP
areas on aircraft.
silicone rubber  a high temperature (200 °C) plastic insulation that has a substantial silicone content.
soldering—a group of welding processes that produces coalescence of materials by heating them to
the soldering temperature and by using a filler
metal having a liquidus not exceeding 450 °C
(840 °F) and below the solidus of the base metals.
The filler metal is distributed between the closelyfitted surfaces of the joint by capillary action.
solenoid  a tubular coil for the production of a
magnetic field; electromagnet with a core which is
able to move in and out.
spar—main spanwise structural member(s) of an
aircraft wing or rotorcraft rotor. A wing may have
one or two made into a single strong box to which
secondary leading and trailing structures are
added.
spiral grain—a type of growth in wood which the
fibers take a spiral course about the bole of a tree
instead of the normal vertical course. The spiral
may extend right-handed or left-handed around the
tree trunk.
stator  the part of an AC generator or motor which
contains the stationary winding.
stress corrosion—corrosion of the intergranular
type that forms within metals subject to tensile
stresses which tend to separate the grain boundaries.
surface tape—pinked-edge strips of fabric doped
over all seams, rib stitching, and edges of fabric
covering (also called finishing tape).
switch  a device for opening or closing an electrical circuit.
tape—a tape or a “narrow fabric” is loosely defined
as a material that ranges in width from 1/4 inch to
12 inches.
TCAS  traffic alert and collision avoidance system.
An airborne system that interrogates mode A, C,
and S transponders in nearby aircraft and uses the
replies to identify and display potential and predicted collision threats.
thermocouple  device to convert heat energy into
electrical energy.
thermoplastic material  a material that can be repeatedly softened by an increase in the temperature
and hardened by a decrease in the temperature with
no accompanying chemical change. For example, a
puddle of tar on the road in the summer during the
heat of day: the tar is soft and fluid; however, when
cooler in the evening, it becomes solid again.
thermoset material  a material which becomes
substantially infusible and insoluble when cured by
the application of heat or by chemical means. A material that will undergo, or has undergone, a chemical
reaction (different from a thermoplastics physical reaction) by the action of heat, catalysts, ultraviolet
light, etc. Once the plastic becomes hard, additional
heat will not change it back into a liquid as would be
the case with a thermoplastic.
tip—part of the torch at the end where the gas
burns, producing the high-temperature flame.
transceiver  a unit serving as both a receiver and
a transmitter.
transformer  a device for raising or lowering AC
voltage.
transmitter  an electronic system designed to
produce modulated RF carrier waves to be radiated
by an antenna; also, an electric device used to collect quantitative information at one point and send
it to a remote indicator electrically.
transponder  an airborne receiver-transmitter designed to aid air traffic control personnel in tracking
aircraft during flight.
unbonding—adhesive or cohesive failure between
laminates. Compare definitions of adhesive, cohesive debond, and disbond.
very high frequency (VHF)  a frequency between
30 and 300 MHz
VHF omnirange (VOR)  an electronic air navigation system that provides accurate direction information in relation to a certain ground station.
videoscope—a type of borescope.
visible light—electromagnetic radiation that has a
wavelength in the range from about 3,900 to 7,700
angstroms and that may be seen by the unaided
human eye.
visual check  utilizing acceptable methods, techniques, and practices to determine physical condition and safety item.
volt  unit of potential, potential difference, or electrical pressure.
voltage regulator  device used in connection with
generators to keep the voltage constant as load or
speed is changed.
warp  threads in a fabric that run the length of the
woven material as it comes from the mill.
watt  the unit of power; equal to a joule per second.
wattmeter  an instrument for measuring electrical
power.
waveguide  a hollow, typically rectangular, metallic tube designed to carry electromagnetic energy
at extremely high frequencies.
wavy-grained wood—wood in which the fibers
collectively take the form of waves or undulations.
welding—a materials-joining process used in making welds.
welding rod—a form of welding filler metal, normally packaged in straight lengths.
welding torch—the device used in gas welding.
wood decay—disintegration of wood substance
through the action of wood-destroying fungi.
wood decay - incipient—the early stage of decay
in which the disintegration has not proceeded far
enough to soften or otherwise perceptibly impair
the hardness of the wood.
wood decay - typical or advanced—the stage of
decay in which the disintegration is readily recognized because the wood has become punky, soft
and spongy, stringy, pitted, or crumbly.
x-ray—a radiographic test method used to detect
internal defects in a weld.
XL-ETFE  A process of radiation cross-linking the
polymer chains is used to thermally set the plastic.
This prevents the material from softening and melting at elevated temperature.
XL-Polyalkene  an insulation material based on the
polyolefin family that has its normally thermomelt
characteristic altered by the radiation cross-linking
process to that of a nonmelt, therm-set material.
