AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 1: MATERIALS AND PRACTICES

1-6. PREPARATION OF WOOD SURFACES FOR BONDING. It is recommended
that no more time than necessary be permitted
to elapse between final surfacing and bonding.
Keep prepared surfaces covered with a clean
plastic sheet or other material to maintain
cleanliness prior to the bonding operation.
The mating surfaces should be machined
smooth and true with planers, joiners, or special miter saws. Planer marks, chipped or
loosened grain, and other surface irregularities
are not permitted. Sandpaper must never be
used to smooth softwood surfaces that are to
be bonded. Sawn surfaces must approach
well-planed surfaces in uniformity, smoothness, and freedom from crushed fibers. It is
advisable to clean both joint surfaces with a
vacuum cleaner just prior to adhesive application. Wood surfaces ready for bonding must
be free from oil, wax, varnish, shellac, lacquer,
enamel, dope, sealers, paint, dust, dirt, adhesive, crayon marks, and other extraneous materials.
a. Roughening smooth, well-planed surfaces of normal wood before bonding is not
recommended. Such treatment of well-planed
wood surfaces may result in local irregularities
and objectionable rounding of edges. When
surfaces cannot be freshly machined before
bonding, such as plywood or inaccessible
members, very slight sanding of the surface
with a fine grit such as 220, greatly improves
penetration by the adhesive of aged or polished
surfaces. Sanding should never be continued
to the extent that it alters the flatness of the
surface. Very light sanding may also improve
the wetting of the adhesive to very hard or
resinous materials.
b. Wetting tests are useful as a means of
detecting the presence of wax, old adhesive,
and finish. A drop of water placed on a surface that is difficult to wet and thus difficult to
bond will not spread or wet the wood rapidly
(in seconds or minutes). The surface may be
difficult to wet due to the presence of wax, exposure of the surface to heat and pressure as in
the manufacture of hot press bonded plywood,
the presence of synthetic resins or wood extractives, or simply chemical or physical
changes in the wood surface with time. Good
wettability is only an indication that a surface
can be bonded satisfactorily. After performing
wetting tests, allow adequate time for wood to
dry before bonding. Preliminary bonding tests
and tests for bond strength are the only positive means of actually determining the bonding
characteristics of the adhesive and material
combinations. (See paragraph 1-29h.)
