AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 3: INSPECTION

1-29. INSPECTION METHODS. Whenever possible, the aircraft should be kept in a
dry, well-ventilated hangar, with all inspection
covers, access panels, etc., removed for as long
as possible before final inspection. The aircraft should be given a preliminary inspection
when first removing the inspection covers and
access panels and inspected with a moisture
meter at this time. If the moisture content is
high, the aircraft should be thoroughly dried.
If the aircraft is dry, this will facilitate later inspection, especially when determining the
condition of bonded joints.
a. Likely locations for wood structure
deterioration should be given special attention.
Most damage is caused by external influence
such as moisture, temperature extremes, or
sunlight. Care should be taken to note all possible entry points for moisture, (i.e., cracks or
breaks in the finish, fastener holes, inspection/access openings, control system openings,
drain holes, and the interfaces of metal fittings
and the wood structure). The mechanic should
also look for evidence of swelling or warpage
of the aircraft’s wood structure, which would
indicate underlying damage or decay. Particular attention should be paid to the wood
structure immediately beneath the upper surfaces, especially under areas that are finished
in dark colors, for signs of deteriorating adhesives. Cracks in wood spars are often hidden
under metal fittings or metal rib flanges and
leading edge skins. Any time a reinforcement
plate exists that is not feathered out on its
ends, a stress riser exists at the ends of the
plate. A failure of the primary structure can be
expected to occur at this point.
b. Tapping the wood structure with a
light plastic hammer or screwdriver handle
should produce a sharp solid report. If the
suspect area sounds hollow and soft, further
inspection is warranted by the following methods.
c. Probe the area in question, if accessible, with a sharp metal tool. The wood structure should be solid and firm. If the suspect
area feels soft and mushy the mechanic should
assume that the area is rotted. Disassembly of
the structure is warranted at this point.
d. Prying the area of a bond joint will reveal any mechanical separation of the joint. If
the mechanic detects any relative movement
between two adjacent wood members, a failure
of the bond is evident. Any loose fittings
should arouse the mechanic’s suspicion, and
the fittings should be removed to check for
elongated bolt holes. Disassembly is warranted for further inspection.
e. Odor is an important indicator of possible deterioration. During the initial inspection, as the access panels are being removed
from the structure, the mechanic should be
aware of any areas that smell musty or moldy.
These odors are indicative of the presence of
moisture and associated fungal growth and
decay.
f. Visual inspection requires looking at
the wood structure both externally and internally for visual signs of decay or physical
damage. Any accumulations of dirt, bird nests,
or rodent nests are likely places to hold moisture and promote decay.
(1) The mechanic should remove any
such accumulations that are found and inspect
the area for signs of decay. Decay will appear
as a dark discoloration or gray stains running
along the grain and often a swelling of the
wood member if still wet. Fittings will be
imbedded in the wood instead of flush.
(2) Highly suspected structurally damaged areas are shown in figure 1-3. A list of
most likely areas to incur structural damage include the following:
(a) Check front and rear spars for
compression cracks adjacent to the plywood
reinforcing plates, where the lift struts attach,
and at the rib attach points on either side of the
strut attach points. Triple-check these areas
and the spar to fuselage attach points for
cracks if the wingtip has contacted the ground,
a hangar wall, etc.
(b) Check all metal fittings which
attach to wooden structure for looseness, corrosion, cracks, or warps. Areas of particular
interest are strut attach fittings, spar butt fittings, aileron and flap hinges, jury strut fittings, compression struts, pulley brackets, and
any landing gear fittings.
(c) Check front and rear spars for
longitudinal cracks at the ends of the plywood
reinforcement plates where the lift struts attach. Triple-check this area if the wing has encountered any kind of ground strike.
(d) Check ribs on either side of strut
attach points for missing or loose rib-to-spar
attach nails.
(e) Check ribs on either side of strut
attach points for cracks where the cap strips
pass over and under the spars.
(f) Check for cracked leading edge
skin and/or failed nose ribs in the area directly
in front of the jury strut.
(g) Check the brackets which attach
the struts to the spars for cracks.
(h) Check the aileron, flap hinge, and
hinge brackets for cracks and loose or missing
rivets.
(i) Check all exposed end grain
wood, particularly the spar butts, for cracking
or checking. Checking, or splitting, of wood
spar butts is common on aircraft based in arid
areas.
[FIG 1-3] Likely areas to incur structural damage.
(j) Also check for any cracks that indicate a bond line failure or structural failure
of the wood member. Any evidence of movement of fittings, bushings, or fasteners should
be cause for concern, and further inspection is
warranted. Splits in fabric covering the plywood, especially on upper surfaces exposed to
ultraviolet light and water, dictate that the mechanic remove the fabric around the split so
the underlying plywood may be inspected for
physical damage or decay. When removing
metal fasteners from wood, check for evidence
of corrosion. Any corrosion present indicates
the presence of moisture and the strong probability of decay in the adjoining wood
structure.
(k) Any wooden member that has
been overstressed is subject to compression
failure (e.g., ground loop). Compression
cracking and failure of the wood spars in certain aircraft are a continuing problem. Compression failures are defined as failure of wood
fibers on a plane perpendicular to the wood fiber’s longitudinal axis. If undetected, compression failures may result in structural failure
of the wing during flight. Compression cracks
have been found emanating from the upper
surfaces of the wing spars and progressing
downward.
(l) The usual locations for cracks
have been the front spar at both ends of the
reinforcement plate for the lift strut and the
front spar rib attach points, both inboard and
outboard of the spar reinforcement plate; and
the rear spar lift strut and rib attach points. An
inspection of both the front and rear spars for
compression cracks is recommended.
(m) The two areas where it is possible to identify a compression crack are on the
face and top surface of the spar. Using a
borescope through existing inspection holes is
one method of inspection. An alternate
method is to cut inspection holes in the skin.
If inspection holes are cut, they should be
made on the aft side of the front spar and the
forward side of the rear spar. This will allow
the fabric to be peeled away from the spar.
Longitudinal cracks may also be detected during this inspection. Loose or missing rib nails
may indicate further damage and should be
thoroughly investigated. The mechanic may
shine a light, at a low angle and parallel with
the grain, in the area of the member
subjected to the compression load. An area of
grain waviness would indicate a potential
compression failure. In all cases the manufacturer’s inspection data should be followed.
g. Moisture Meters are effective tools for
detection of excessive moisture content in
wood members. An instrument such as this
allows the mechanic to insert a probe into the
wood member and read its moisture content directly off the meter. A correction chart usually
accompanies the instrument to correct for temperature and species of wood. Any reading
over 20 percent indicates the probability of
fungus growth in the member. Moisture content of the wood should be 8-16 percent, preferably in the 10-12 percent range (this range is
during inspection). Where plywood skin covers the spar and the spar would be inaccessible
without removing the skin, the moisture meter
probe can be inserted through the plywood
skin and into the spar to check the moisture
content of the spar. The small holes made by
the probe are easily sealed.
h. Destructive testing of sample bonded
joints whenever a new bond joint is made, a
sample joint should be made with the adhesive
from the same batch used on the repair and
scraps of wood left over from the repair. After
curing, the sample joint should be destructively tested to ensure proper bonding of the
two wood pieces. Any failure in the bond line
indicates a cohesive failure of the adhesive.
Any failure along the bond line indicates an
adhesive failure, which is indicative of poor
bonding. The ideal situation is when wood fibers are observed on both sides of the fracture
surface. This indicates a failure in the wood,
and indicates the bond joint is actually stronger
than the wood.
1-30.1-35.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 4. REPAIRS
