AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 1: MATERIALS AND PRACTICES

1-2. WOODS.
a. Quality of Wood. All wood and plywood used in the repair of aircraft structures
should be of aircraft quality (reference Army
Navy Commerce Department Bulletin
ANC-19, Wood Aircraft Inspection and Fabrication). Table 1-1 lists some permissible
variations in characteristics and properties of
aircraft wood. However, selection and approval of woodstock for aircraft structural use
are specialized skills and should be done by
personnel who are thoroughly familiar with inspection criteria and methods.
[FIG 1-1] Relative shrinkage of wood members due to
b. Substitution of Original Wood. The
wood species used to repair a part should be
the same as that of the original whenever possible; however, some permissible substitutes
are given in table 1-1. Obtain approval from
the airframe manufacturer or the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) for the replacement of modified woods or other nonwood products with a substitute material.
c. Effects of Shrinkage. When the
moisture content of a wooden part is lowered,
the part shrinks. Since the shrinkage is not
equal in all directions, the mechanic should
consider the effect that the repair may have on
the completed structure. The shrinkage is
greatest in a tangential direction (across the fibers and parallel to the growth rings), somewhat less in a radial direction (across the fibers
and perpendicular to the growth rings), and is
negligible in a longitudinal direction (parallel
to the fibers). Figure 1-1 illustrates the different grain directions and the effects of shrinkage on the shape of a part. These dimensional
changes can have several detrimental effects
upon a wood structure, such as loosening of
drying.
[TABLE 1-1] Selection and Properties of Aircraft Wood. (See
Maximum
Species of Wood Strength proper- permissible
ties as compared grain deviation
to spruce (slope of grain)
1. 2. 3.
Spruce(Picea) Sitka (P.
Sitchensis) Red (P. Rubra) 100% 1:15
White (P. Glauca).
Douglas Fir Exceeds spruce. 1:15
(Pseudotsuga Taxifolia).
Slightly exceeds Satisfactory characteristics with respect to workNoble Fir spruce except 1:15
(Abies Nobiles). 8% deficient in
shear. shear does not become critical. Hardness someSlightly exceeds Less uniform in texture than spruce. May be used
Western Hemlock spruce. 1:15
(Tsuga Heterpphylla).
Properties be- Excellent working qualities and uniform in properPine, Northern White (Pinus tween 85 % and
Strobus). 96 % those of 1:15
spruce. for spruce without increase in sizes to compensate
White Cedar, Port Orford Exceeds spruce. 1:15
(Charaecyparis Lawsoniana).
Poplar, Yellow (Liriodendrow Slightly less than
Tulipifera). spruce except in 1:15
compression counting for slightly reduced strength properties.
(crushing) and Somewhat low in shock-resisting capacity. Gluing
shear. satisfactory.
Notes for Table 1-1
1. Defects Permitted.
a. Cross grain. Spiral grain, diagonal grain, or a combination
not diverge from the longitudinal axis of the material more than
board is necessary to determine the amount of divergence.
determining grain direction.
b. Wavy, curly, and interlocked grain. Acceptable, if local
spiral and diagonal grain.
c. Hard knots. Sound, hard knots up to 3/8 inch in maximum
not projecting portions of I-beams, along the edges of rectangular
flanges of box beams (except in lowly stressed portions); (2)
the board or in the flanges of a beam more than specified in
beam and are not closer than 20 inches to another knot or
may be proportionately closer). Knots greater than 1/4 inch must
d. Pin knot clusters. Small clusters are acceptable providing
e. Pitch pockets. Acceptable in center portion of a beam
lie in the same growth ring and do not exceed 1-1/2 inches length
they are not along the projecting portions of I-beams, along
along the edges of the flanges of box beams.
f. Mineral streaks. Acceptable, providing careful inspection
notes following table.)
Remarks
4.
Excellent for all uses. Considered as standard for
this table.
May be used as substitute for spruce in same sizes
or in slightly reduced sizes providing reductions are
substantiated. Difficult to work with handtools.
Some tendency to split and splinter during fabrication and considerable more care in manufacture is
necessary. Large solid pieces should be avoided
due to inspection difficulties. Gluing satisfactory.
ability, warping, and splitting. May be used as direct substitute for spruce in same sizes providing
what less than spruce. Gluing satisfactory.
as direct substitute for spruce. Upland growth superior to lowland growth. Gluing satisfactory.
ties, but somewhat low in hardness and shockresisting capacity. Cannot be used as substitute
for lesser strength. Gluing satisfactory.
May be used as substitute for spruce in same sizes
or in slightly reduced sizes providing reductions are
substantiated. Easy to work with handtools. Gluing difficult, but satisfactory joints can be obtained
if suitable precautions are taken.
Excellent working qualities. Should not be used as
a direct substitute for spruce without carefully acof the two is acceptable providing the grain does
specified in column 3. A check of all four faces of the
The direction of free-flowing ink will frequently assist in
irregularities do not exceed limitations specified for
diameter are acceptable providing: (1) they are
or beveled unrouted beams, or along the edges of
they do not cause grain divergence at the edges of
column 3; and (3) they are in the center third of the
other defect (pertains to 3/8 inch knots—smaller knots
be used with caution.
they produce only a small effect on grain direction.
providing they are at least 14 inches apart when they
by 1/8 inch width by 1/8 inch depth, and providing
the edges of rectangular or beveled unrouted beams, or
fails to reveal any decay.
[TABLE 1-1] Selection and Properties of Aircraft Wood. (See
2. Defects Not Permitted.
a. Cross grain. Not acceptable, unless within limitations
b. Wavy, curly, and interlocked grain. Not acceptable,
c. Hard knots. Not acceptable, unless within limitations
d. Pin knot clusters. Not acceptable, if they produce
e. Spike knots. These are knots running completely
rings and appear most frequently in quarter-sawed lumber.
f. Pitch pockets. Not acceptable, unless within limitations
g. Mineral streaks. Not acceptable, if accompanied
h. Checks, shakes, and splits. Checks are longitudinal
Shakes are longitudinal cracks usually between two annual
induced stress. Reject wood containing these defects.
i. Compression wood. This defect is very detrimental
acterized by high specific gravity, has the appearance of
shows little contrast in color between spring wood and summer
ject samples to toughness machine test to establish the quality
sion wood.
j. Compression failures. This defect is caused from
ral forces during the growth of the tree, felling trees on rough
Compression failures are characterized by a buckling of the
substantially at right angles to the grain, and vary from
inspection to detect. Reject wood containing obvious failures.
inspection in the form of microscopic examination or toughness
k. Decay. Examine all stains and discoloration carefully
stage of preliminary or advanced decay. All pieces must
forms of decay.
fittings and wire bracing and checking or
splitting of wood members. A few suggestions
for minimizing these shrinkage effects are:
(1) Use bushings that are slightly short
so that when the wood member shrinks the
bushings do not protrude and the fittings may
be tightened firmly against the member.
(2) Gradually drop off plywood faceplates by feathering as shown in figure 1-2.
(3) Thoroughly seal all wood surfaces,
particularly end grain and bolt holes, with varnish, epoxy, or other acceptable sealer to slow
or prevent moisture changes in the member.
(See Section 5. Finishing Wood Structures.)
