AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 5: FINISHING WOOD STRUCTURES

1-66. PRECAUTIONS.
a. When making repairs, avoid excessive contamination of surfaces with adhesive
squeeze-out at joints and on all surfaces. Excess adhesive should always be removed before applying finish. Because many paints and
adhesives are incompatible, even a slight
amount of adhesive underneath the finish may
cause premature deterioration of the finish.
b. Soiling substances, such as oil and
grease, should be removed as completely as
possible. Naphtha may be used to remove surface deposits of oil and grease; however,
thinned residue may penetrate into any unprotected wood. In areas where minor amounts of
oil or grease have penetrated the wood surface,
removal may be accomplished by use of an absorbent type of cleaner such as gunsmith's
K2r™.
whiting or a clothing spot lifter such as
Marks that are made by grease pencils or lumber crayons containing wax are harmful and
should be removed, but marks made by ordinary soft graphite pencils and nonoily stamp
pad inks may be safely finished over. All dust,
dirt, and other solid particles should be
removed.
c. Sawdust, shavings, and chips must be
removed from enclosed spaces before they are
sealed off by replacement of skin. A vacuum
cleaner is useful for such cleaning.
d. Since most adhesives will not bond
satisfactorily to sealers, it is necessary to avoid
applying sealer over the areas where adhesive
will be applied. Mark off areas to receive adhesive, and allow an additional 1/4 inch on
each side of the adhesive area to provide for
misalignment when mating the parts. It is
preferable to leave some unsealed areas rather
than risk weakening the joint by accidental
overlap of the sealer into the bonded areas.
Wherever possible, apply sealer to the margins
after the adhesive has cured. As an example,
the lower skin of a wing bay would be installed first, leaving access from above to apply sealer. All low spots (where moisture
would collect) are well sealed. The top skin
would be installed last, so that the only unsealed margins would be on upper surfaces
where moisture is least likely to collect.
e. An alternative to the previous paragraph is to use an approved epoxy coating and
compatible epoxy adhesive. Apply the coating, allowing 1/4 inch margins as in the previous paragraph. After the coating has cured,
apply epoxy adhesive to joint surfaces, and
overlap the adhesive onto the sealer. Close
joint and clamp. The epoxy adhesive will
bond satisfactorily to the coating and ensure a
complete coverage of the wood surfaces. Use
only approved and compatible adhesives and
coatings for this method.
