AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 1: MATERIALS AND PRACTICES

1-4. ADHESIVES. Because of the critical
role played by adhesives in aircraft structure,
the mechanic must employ only those types of
adhesives that meet all of the performance requirements necessary for use in certificated
civil aircraft. Use each product strictly in accordance with the aircraft and adhesive manufacturer’s instructions.
a. Adhesives acceptable to the FAA can
be identified in the following ways:
(1) Refer to the aircraft maintenance or
repair manual for specific instructions on acceptable adhesive selection for use on that type
aircraft.
(2) Adhesives meeting the requirements
of a Military Specification (Mil Spec), Aerospace Material Specification (AMS), or Technical Standard Order (TSO) for wooden aircraft structures are satisfactory providing they
are found to be compatible with existing
structural materials in the aircraft and the fabrication methods to be used in the repair.
b. Common types of adhesives that are
or have been used in aircraft structure fall into
two general groups: casein and syntheticresins. Adhesive technology continues to
evolve, and new types (meeting the requirements of paragraph 1-4a) may become available in the future.
(1) Casein adhesive performance is
generally considered inferior to other products
available today, modern adhesives should be
considered first.
CAUTION: Casein adhesive deteriorates over the years after exposure to
moisture in the air and temperature
variations. Some modern adhesives
are incompatible with casein adhesive.
If a joint that has previously been
bonded with casein is to be rebonded
with another type adhesive, all traces
of the casein must be scraped off before the new adhesive is applied. If
any casein adhesive is left, residual alkalinity may cause the new adhesive to
fail to cure properly.
(2) Synthetic-resin adhesives comprise
a broad family which includes plastic resin
glue, resorcinol, hot-pressed Phenol, and epoxy.
(3) Plastic resin glue (urea-formaldehyde resin glue) has been used in wood aircraft
for many years. Caution should be used due to
possible rapid deterioration (more rapidly than
wood) of plastic resin glue in hot, moist environments and under cyclic swell-shrink stress.
For these reasons, urea-formaldehyde should
be considered obsolete for all repairs. Any
proposed use of this type adhesive should be
discussed with the appropriate FAA office
prior to using on certificated aircraft.
(4) Federal Specification MMM-A181D and Military Specification MIL-A-22397
both describe a required series of tests that
verify the chemical and mechanical properties
of resorcinol. Resorcinol is the only known
adhesive recommended and approved for use
in wooden aircraft structure and fully meets
necessary strength and durability requirements.
Resorcinol adhesive (resorcinol-formaldehyde
resin) is a two-part synthetic resin adhesive
consisting of resin and a hardener. The appropriate amount of hardener (per manufacturer’s
instruction) is added to the resin, and it is
stirred until it is uniformly mixed; the adhesive
is now ready for immediate use. Quality of fit
and proper clamping pressure are both critical
to the achievement of full joint strength. The
adhesive bond lines must be very thin and uniform in order to achieve full joint strength.
CAUTION: Read and observe material safety data. Be sure to follow the
manufacturer’s instructions regarding
mixing, open assembly and close assembly times, and usable temperature
ranges.
(5) Phenol-formaldehyde adhesive is
commonly used in the manufacturing of aircraft grade plywood. This product is cured at
elevated temperature and pressure; therefore, it
is not practical for use in structural repair.
(6) Epoxy adhesives are a two-part
synthetic resin product, and are acceptable
providing they meet the requirements of paragraph 1-4a. Many new epoxy resin systems
appear to have excellent working properties.
They have been found to be much less critical
of joint quality and clamping pressure. They
penetrate well into wood and plywood. However, joint durability in the presence of elevated temperature or moisture is inadequate in
many epoxies. The epoxy adhesives generally
consist of a resin and a hardener that are mixed
together in the proportions specified by the
manufacturer. Depending on the type of epoxy, pot life may vary from a few minutes to
an hour. Cure times vary between products.
CAUTION: Some epoxies may have
unacceptable thermal or other hidden
characteristics not obvious in a shop
test. It is essential that only those
products meeting the requirements of
paragraph 1-4a be used in aircraft repair. Do not vary the resin-tohardener ratio in an attempt to alter
the cure time. Strength, thermal, and
chemical resistance will be adversely
affected. Read and observe material
safety data. Be sure to follow the adhesive manufacturer’s instructions regarding mixing, open and closed curing time, and usable temperature
ranges.
