AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 4: REPAIRS

1-46. RIB REPAIRS. Ribs may be replaced
by new parts made by the manufacturer or the
holder of a PMA for that part. Ownerproduced ribs may be installed providing they
are made from a manufacturer-approved
drawing or by reference to an existing original
rib. A rib may be made by reference to an existing rib providing sufficient evidence is presented to verify that the existing rib is an
original part and that all materials and dimensions can be determined. The contour of the
rib is important to the safe flying qualities of
the aircraft, and care should be taken that any
replacement ribs accurately match the manufacturer’s original design.
Section A-A
[FIG 1-7] Repairs to built-up “I” spar.
a. Rib Repair Methods. Acceptable
methods of repairing damaged ribs are shown
in figure 1-11. Wood ribs should not be nailed
to wood spars by driving nails through the rib
cap strips, as this weakens the rib materially.
The attachment should be by means of adhesive with cement coated, barbed, or spiraled
nails driven through the vertical rib members
on each face of the spar.
b. Compression Rib Repair. Acceptable
methods of repairing damaged compression
ribs are shown in figure 1-12.
(1) Figure 1-12(A) illustrates the repair
of a compression rib of the “I” section type;
i.e., wide, shallow cap strips, and a center plywood web with a rectangular compression
member on each side of the web. The rib is
Ends of reinforcement plates
should be feathered out
with a 5:1 slope.
assumed to be cracked through the cap strips,
web member, and compression member in the
illustration. Cut the compression member as
shown in figure 1-12(D). Cut and replace the
aft portion of the cap strips, and reinforce as
shown in figure 1-11. The plywood side plates
are bonded on, as indicated in figure 1-12(A).
These plates are added to reinforce the damaged web.
(2) Figure 1-12(B) illustrates a compression rib of the type that is basically a standard rib with rectangular compression members added to one side and plywood web to the
other side. The method used in this repair is
essentially the same as in figure 1-12(A) except that the plywood reinforcement plate,
[FIG 1-8] Method of splicing box spar flanges (plate method).
shown in section B-B, is continued the full
distance between spars.
(3) Figure 1-12(C) illustrates a compression rib of the “I” type with a rectangular
vertical member on each side of the web. The
method of repair is essentially the same as in
figure 1-12(A) except the plywood reinforcement plates on each side, shown as striped
blocks in section C-C, are continued the full
distance between spars.
