AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 1: MATERIALS AND PRACTICES

1-11. METHOD OF APPLYING PRESSURE. The methods of applying pressure to
joints in aircraft bonding operations range
from the use of brads, nails, small screws, and
clamps; to the use of hydraulic and electrical
power presses. The selection of appropriate
clamping means is important to achieving
sound bond joints.
a. Hand nailing is used rather extensively
in the bonding of ribs and in the application of
plywood skins to the wing, control surfaces,
and fuselage frames. Small brass screws may
also be used advantageously when the particular parts to be bonded are relatively small
and do not allow application of pressure by
means of clamps. Both nails and screws produce adverse after effects. There is considerable risk of splitting small parts when installing nails or screws. Metal fasteners also provide vulnerable points for moisture to enter
during service.
b. On small joints using thin plywood for
gussets or where plywood is used as an outer
skin, the pressure is usually applied by nailing
or stapling. Thin plywood nailing strips are
often used to spread the nailing pressure over a
larger area and to facilitate removal of the nails
after the adhesive has cured.
c. The size of the nails must vary with
the size of the members. If multiple rows of
nails are required, the nails should be 1 inch
apart in rows spaced 1/2 inch apart. The nails
in adjacent rows should be staggered. In no
case should the nails in adjacent rows be more
than 3/4 inch from the nearest nail. The length
of the nails should be such that they penetrate
the wood below the joint at least 3/8 inch. In
the case of small members, the end of the nail
should not protrude through the member below
the joint. Hit the nails with several light
strokes, just seating the head into the surface
of the gusset. Be careful not to crush the wood
with a heavy hammer blow.
d. In some cases the nails are removed
after adhesive cure, while in others the nails
are left in place. The nails are employed for
clamping pressure during adhesive cure and
must not be expected to hold members together in service. In deciding whether to re
move nails after assembly, the mechanic
should examine adjacent structure to see
whether nails remain from original manufacture.
e. On larger members (spar repairs for
example), apply pressure by means of screw
clamps, such as a cabinet-maker’s bar or
“C-clamps.” Strips or blocks should be used
to distribute clamping pressure and protect
members from local crushing due to the
limited pressure area of the clamps, especially
when one member is thin (such as plywood).
The strip or block should be at least twice as
thick as the thinner member being bonded.
f. Immediately after clamping or nailing
a member, the mechanic must examine the entire joint to assure uniform part contact and
adhesive squeeze-out. Wipe away excess adhesive.
1-12.1-17.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 2. HEALTH AND SAFETY
