AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 3: INSPECTION

1-28. TYPES OF DETERIORATION
AND DAMAGE.
a. Wood Decay. Wood is an organic
product which is subject to attack by fungi.
Fungi are plants that grow on and in wood.
The moisture content of the wood nominally
will have to be 20 percent or greater to sustain
fungus growth. The result of this growth is
called decay. Decayed wood exhibits softness,
swelling if still wet, excessive shrinkage when
dry, cracking, and discoloration. Repair or replace wood if any amount or form of decay is
found.
b. Splitting. Splits or cracks in wooden
members occur along grain lines. When the
moisture content of wood is lowered, its dimensions decrease. The dimensional change is
greatest in a tangential direction (across the fibers and parallel to the growth rings), somewhat less in a radial direction (across the fibers
and perpendicular to the growth rings), and is
negligible in a longitudinal direction (parallel
to the fibers). These dimensional changes can
have detrimental effects upon a wood structure, particularly when two parts are bonded
together with grains in different directions.
This effect can often be seen where a plywood
doubler is bonded to a spruce member. As the
spruce member dries, it attempts to shrink, but
is restrained by the plywood, which shrinks
less. The resulting stress in the spruce member
exceeds its cross-grain strength, and a split occurs.
c. Bond Failure. Bond joint failure is
generally due to improper fabrication technique or prolonged exposure to moisture in
service. Although none of the older adhesives
have been specifically found to fail by simple
aging, the mechanic is advised to inspect all
accessible joints carefully.
d. Finish Failure. The finish coat on
wood structure (usually varnish) is the last line
of defense to prevent water entry into wood
and the resulting decay. Finish failure can be
the result of prolonged water exposure, wood
splitting, ultraviolet light exposure, or surface
abrasion.
e. Damage. Stress, impact, or mechanical
damage to a wood structure is caused by excessive aerodynamic loads or impact loads occurring while the aircraft is on the ground.
Overtightening of fittings can also cause
crushing of the underlying wood member and
possible bending of the metal fitting.
