AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 1: WOOD STRUCTURE  Section 4: REPAIRS

1-44. SPAR LONGITUDINAL CRACKS
AND LOCAL DAMAGE. Cracked spars
(except box spars) may be repaired by bonding
plates of spruce or plywood of sufficient
thickness to develop the longitudinal shear on
both sides of the spar. Extend the plates well
beyond the termination of the cracks, as shown
in figure 1-10. A method of repairing small
local damage to either the top or bottom side
of a spar is also shown in figure 1-10.
a. Longitudinal Cracking of Wood
Wing Spars of Aircraft Operating in Arid
Regions. Aircraft having wood spars and operating in arid regions may develop longitudinal spar cracks in the vicinity of the plywood
reinforcement plates. These cracks result from
the tendency of the spar to shrink when drying
takes place. Plywood resists this tendency to
Reinforcement plates to be spruce or
with the ends feathered off at 5:1
Solid spars may be replaced with
provided the material is of the same high quality.
[FIG 1-5] Method of splicing solid or laminated rectangular
shrink and causes the basic spar stock to split
(see paragraph 1-2c). Cracks start under the
plywood plates, usually (but not necessarily) at
a bolt hole or cutout, and usually spread in
each direction until they extend a short distance beyond the ends of the plates where the
resistance to spar shrinkage disappears.
Cracks have also been found in the butt end of
spars. Other factors, which have been found
conducive to the formation of cracks are poor
protective finishes, large cutouts, and metal
fittings that utilize two lines of large diameter
bolts.
b. Repairing Cracks Versus Installing a
New Spar. The presence of cracks does not
necessarily mean that the spar must be discarded. If the crack is not too long or too close
to either edge and can be reinforced properly,
it will probably be more economical and
plywood and should be bonded only,
slope as depicted in Figure 1-2.
laminated spars or vice versa,
spars.
satisfactory to perform repair rather than install
a new spar or section. However, a generally
acceptable procedure suitable for all airplane
models is not available. Because of the possibility of strength deficiencies contact the
manufacturer. In absence of the manufacturer,
the FAA should be contacted for approval before making repairs not in accordance with the
manufacturer-approved instructions or the recommendations of this advisory circular. Longitudinal cracking or the recurrence of cracking can be minimized by ensuring that the
moisture content of the solid wood portion is
within the proper range before bonding. In
arid desert areas, during bonding the moisture
content should be in the range of 6-8 percent
before bonding, but in other areas
10-12 percent is satisfactory. If solid or plywood repair stock is procured from another
climatic region, it should be allowed to season,
If splice is made where routing is feathered
plates (conforming to the contour of the routing)
otherwise, the splice is the same as shown.
Reinforcement plates may be of plywood,
spar, or material of equal or higher
only with ends feathered out with a
[FIG 1-6] Method of splicing solid “I” spars.
in the same storage area as the part to be repaired, for no less than 2 weeks.
c. Preventing Cracks. An important step
in the prevention of longitudinal cracking,
particularly in spar butts, is to ensure that the
wood is thoroughly sealed with a penetrating
and highly moisture-resistant finish. Application of a thin, slow-curing epoxy adhesive or
sealer can be very effective in slowing or preventing moisture changes in spar butts.
