AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 1: PRACTICES AND PRECAUTIONS

2-7. FABRIC SEAMS. Seams parallel to
the line of flight are preferable; however,
spanwise seams are acceptable.
a. Sewn Seams.
(1) Machine-sewn seams should be
double stitched using any of the styles illustrated in figure 2-1 A, B, C, or D. A machinesewn seam used to close an envelope at a
wingtip, wing trailing edge, empennage and
control surface trailing edge, and a fuselage
longeron may be made with a single stitch
when the seam will be positioned over a
structure. (See figure 2-1 E.) The envelope
size should accommodate fittings or other
small protrusions with minimum excess for installation. Thick or protruding leading edge
sewn seams should be avoided on thin airfoils
with a sharp leading edge radius because they
may act as a stall strip.
(2) Hand sew, with plain overthrow or
baseball stitches at a minimum of four stitches
per inch, or permanent tacking, to the point
where uncut fabric or a machine-sewn seam is
reached. Lock hand sewing at a maximum
of 10 stitch intervals with a double half hitch,
and tie off the end stitch with a double half
hitch. At the point where the hand-sewing or
permanent tacking is necessary, cut the fabric
so that it can be doubled under a minimum of
3/8 inch before sewing or permanent tacking is
performed. (See figure 2-2.)
(3) After hand sewing is complete, any
temporary tacks used to secure the fabric over
wood structures may be removed.
(4) Cover a sewn spanwise seam on a
wing’s leading edge with a minimum 4-inch
wide pinked-edged surface tape with the tape
centered on the seam.
(5) Cover a spanwise-sewn seam at the
wing trailing edge with pinked-edge surface
tape that is at least 3 inches wide. For aircraft
with never-exceed speeds in excess of
200 mph, cut V notches at least 1 inch in depth
and 1/4 inch in width in both edges of the surface tape when used to cover spanwise seams
on trailing edges of control surfaces. Space
notches at intervals not exceeding 6 inches.
On tape less than 3 inches wide, the notches
should be 1/3 the tape width. In the event the
surface tape begins to separate because of poor
adhesion or other causes, the tape will tear at a
notched section, thus preventing progressive
loosening of the entire length of the tape which
could seriously affect the controllability of the
aircraft. A loose tape acts as a trim tab only on
a movable surface. It becomes a spoiler on a
fixed surface and has no effect at the trailing
edge other than drag.
(6) Make spanwise-sewn seams on the
wing’s upper or lower surfaces in a manner
that will minimize any protrusions. Cover the
seams with finishing tape at least 3 inches
wide, centering the tape on the seam.
(7) Sewn seams parallel to the line of
flight (chordwise) may be located over ribs.
However, careful attention must be given to
avoid damage to the seam threads by rib lace
needles, screws, rivets, or wire clips that are
used to attach the fabric to the rib. Cover
chordwise seams with a finishing tape at least
3 inches wide with the tape centered on the
seam.
b. Doped Seams.
(1) For an overlapped and doped spanwise seam on a wing’s leading edge, overlap
the fabric at least 4 inches and cover with finishing tape at least 4 inches wide, with the tape
centered at the outside edge of the overlap
seam.
(2) For an overlapped and doped spanwise seam at the trailing edge, lap the fabric at
least 3 inches and cover with pinked-edge surface tape at least 4 inches wide, with the tape
centered on the outside edge of the overlap
seam.
(3) For an overlapped and doped seam
on wingtips, wing butts, perimeters of wing
control surfaces, perimeters of empennage surfaces, and all fuselage areas, overlap the fabric
2 inches and cover with a finishing tape that is
at least 3 inches wide, centered on the outside
edge of the overlap seam.
(4) For an overlapped and doped seam
on a wing’s leading edge, on aircraft with a
velocity never exceed (Vne) speed up to and
including 150 mph, overlap the fabric 2 inches
and cover with a finishing tape that is at least
3 inches wide, with the tape centered on the
outside edge of the overlap seam.
[FIG 2-1] Fabric seams.
TEMPORARY TACKS MAY BE USED TO SECURE
SEWN SEAMS OVER A WOOD STRUCTURE. PERMANENT
TO SECURE FABRIC AT WING BUTT STRUCTURES
SEAM AND SHOULD BE OF THE APPROPRIATE
OF CORROSION RESISTANT STEEL OR BRASS.
[FIG 2-2] Typical methods of attaching fabric.
FABRIC IN POSITION FOR HANDTACKS MAY BE USED
IN LIEU OF A HAND-SEWN
LENGTH AND GAUGE, AND MADE
(5) For an overlapped and doped seam
on the perimeter of a wing (except a leading
edge), perimeters of wing control surfaces, perimeters of empennage surfaces, and all areas
of a fuselage, on aircraft with a Vne speed up
to and including 150 mph, overlap the fabric
1 inch and cover with a finishing tape that is at
least 3 inches wide, centered on the outside
edge of the overlap seam.
