AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 4: REPAIRS TO FABRIC COVERING

2-42. GENERAL. All materials used to
make repairs to fabric covering must be of a
quality at least equal to the original materials.
Workmanship and repair methods must be
made in a manner that will return the fabric
covering to its original airworthy condition.
a. Any combination of seams hand-sewn
and overlapped and doped may be used to
make repairs and install new fabric sections.
(See paragraph 2-7.)
b. All pigmented dope coats, including
aluminum-pigmented coats, should be removed to the clear dope preliminary coats before installing a new fabric section or finishing
tape on the old fabric. The appropriate dope
thinner (see paragraph 2-20) may be applied
with a brush to soften the old dope. The softened coats can then be removed down to the
clear dope coats by scraping with a dull-bladed
knife while supporting the fabric from the back
side. Removing the old dope by sanding is
optional.
c. Avoid allowing dope to run down the
back side of the fabric or drip through the wing
onto the back side of the opposite surface,
which will cause cosmetic damage and will
show in a high gloss finish.
d. Repairing a new fabric section over
two adjacent wing ribs is considered a major
repair. A log book entry and an FAA
Form 337 must be processed accordingly.
e. All fabric patch edges not covered
with a finishing tape should have a pinked
edge or a 1/4-inch raveled edge.
f. Where the edge of a new fabric section will be located within 1 inch of a structural member to which the fabric is attached by
rib lacing or other methods, the new fabric
section should be extended 3 inches past the
structural member.
NOTE: Before installing new finishing tape, duplicate the original rib
lacing or other attachments without
removing the original rib lacing or attachment. Removing the original finishing tape is optional.
g. When installing large sections of fabric on a wing or other components, all machine-sewn and/or overlapped and doped
seams should be made in accordance with the
guidelines specified in paragraphs 2-7 and 2-8.
h. When repairing a covering material
other than cotton or linen, which was approved with the manufacturer’s type certificate
(TC), or approved under the authority of an
STC, follow the repair instructions furnished
by the aircraft manufacturer or supplier of the
STC-approved covering materials.
