AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 1: PRACTICES AND PRECAUTIONS

2-10. LACING.
a. Fabric should be attached to aircraft
components to prevent ballooning due to
aerodynamic forces, in the identical manner
and locations as used by the original aircraft
manufacturer. Any deviation from the original
method(s) of attachment, such as screws, rivets, wire clips, lacing cord, etc., are considered
a major alteration and in conflict with the aircraft type design data. Obtain FAA approval
on any deviation.
NOTE: When the type of rib lace
knot used by the original aircraft
manufacturer is not known, the modified seine knot shown in figure 2-4
through figure 2-9c will be used.
[FIG 2-4] Standard external modified seine knot used
for single and double rib lacing.
b. During the installation of lacing cord
through a wing or any other component, special attention should be given to avoid interference with the routing of any control cable,
bellcrank, or any other movable item. To prevent chafing and cutting of the lacing cord,
control cables or any other movable items
should be tensioned or positioned to their
normal alignment before rib lacing and
checked afterwards to ensure adequate clearance. When a lace cord will be chafed by a
moving component, a blindstitch may be made
around the top and bottom rib caps as illustrated in figure 2-11.
c. Stationary structures interfering with
needle routing may be circumvented by aligning the needle forward or aft adjacent to the rib
cap. Pull the needle through the wing and then
return through the same hole and exit at the
desired adjacent location.
NOTE: The first lace on a wing rib
should be spaced from the leading
edge fairing no more than 1/2 the required lace spacing for the balance of
the rib.
d. Both surfaces of fabric covering on
wings and control surfaces must be securely
fastened to the ribs by lacing cord or any other
method originally approved for the aircraft.
Care must be taken to insure that all sharp
edges against which the lacing cord may bear
are protected by tape in order to prevent abrasion of the cord. Separate lengths of lacing
cord may be joined by the splice knot shown in
figure 2-10 or tied off. The first loop is tied
with a square knot as illustrated in figure 2-5
and figure 2-9a, and the knot secured with a
half hitch on each side after the lacing is pulled
tight around the rib. The needle is then routed
through the wing and around the rib cap at the
[FIG 2-5] Starting stitch for rib lacing.
[FIG 2-6] Standard single-loop lacing.
[FIG 2-7] Standard knot for double-loop lacing.
[FIG 2-8] Standard double-loop lacing (optional).
FIGURE 2-9a. Alternate sequence to tie a modified seine knot
for rib lacing.
FIGURE 2-9b. Alternate sequence to tie a modified seine
knot for rib lacing.
Step 9. Pull cord section “D” perpendicular to the fabric surface to remove all slack in the cord back to the last
rib lacing knot while working the loose knot to the
right side. Do not pull cord section “E.”
FIGURE 2-9c. Alternate sequence to tie a modified seine knot for
Step 10. After all slack is removed by pulling cord section “D,”
switch hands and place a thumbnail on the loose
knot formed on the right-hand side, then secure the
knot by pulling firmly perpendicular to the fabric
surface on cord section “E.”
Step 11. After completing all lacing in the same sequence,
the end is secured with a half hitch after the modified seine knot. The knot is pulled to the inside by
routing the needle thru the wing before cutting the
cord to leave the end inside.
rib lacing.
next rib lace location with the cord and knot
remaining on top of the fabric surface as illustrated in figure 2-5, figure 2-6, and figure 2-8.
An alternate method is to route the needle under the fabric and out through the next lace location, then back down through the wing as
illustrated in figure 2-9a through figure 2-9c.
A modified seine knot is then tied as illustrated
in figure 2-4 through figure 2-9c.
(1) Rotate each lace loop to place the
knot at the side of the rib cap to reduce the
protrusion and aerodynamic interference before moving to the next lace location, or the
cord routed under the fabric to the next lace
location as illustrated in figure 2-9a through
figure 2-9c. The end cord is then cut off leaving a minimum of 1/4 inch stub. Lacing tension should be uniform.
(2) Repeated pulling of long lengths of
lacing cord may remove wax coating from the
cord and cause fraying. Convenient lengths of
rib lacing cord may be used to lace long or
thick ribs. The end of each length is tied off
with a half hitch as illustrated in figure 2-9c, or
if needed, separate lengths of lacing cord may
be joined by using the splice knot illustrated in
figure 2-10.
(3) Lacing is installed through other
components, where applicable, in the same
manner as a wing. Single, wide space lace attachments, usually used on empennage surfaces, are tied with a square knot and half hitch
on each side, the same as a starting wing rib
lace illustrated in figure 2-9a, steps 1 and 2.
The lace may be rotated to place the knot under the fabric before cutting the cord.
e. Blind lacing on a fuselage, wing rib
caps above and below a fuel tank, and any
other component, when used by the original
aircraft manufacturer, should be reinstalled in
the same location and spacing as installed by
the original aircraft manufacturer. The lace
cord is routed around the stringer, rib cap, or
other structure using an appropriate length,
single or double pointed, curved needle as illustrated in figure 2-11. Blind laces are tied
with a square knot, then pulled tight and secured with a half hitch at each side. The lace
may be rotated to place the knot under the fabric surface before cutting the cord.
The splice knot is made by crossing the
ends of the cord, and making four complete
wraps with the small end of the free piece around
the end of the standing piece. The end is then
doubled back through the formed loop. The
other free end is wrapped and doubled back.
The long ends of the cords are then pulled until
the knot is tight. The short ends are cut close to
the knot. This finishes the splice knot.
[FIG 2-10] Splice knot.
