AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 2: APPLICATION OF DOPE

2-22. COVERING OVER PLYWOOD.
Exposed, stressed plywood surfaces, such as
wings, must be protected from weather
deterioration with fabric at least equal to that
used by the original manufacturer. If the quality is not known, intermediate-grade fabric,
meeting TSO-C14b specification, is acceptable. Fabric may be installed in sections with
a 1/2 inch edge overlap without covering the
overlap with finishing tape. Fabric may also
be installed with the edges butted together, and
the seam covered with a minimum 1-inch wide
finishing tape. The seams may be oriented in
any direction, in reference to the line of flight.
However, overlapped seams, not covered with
a finishing tape, should be oriented rearward.
Fabric should be wrapped completely around a
wing’s leading and trailing edges and other
components, where possible, to provide fabricto-fabric continuity around all edges to avoid a
poorly-bonded fabric edge from peeling from
the plywood surface causing serious aerodynamic consequences.
a. After the plywood surface is prepared, and the two pre-coats of clear dope
have dried as recommended in paragraph 2-6 g, the fabric is pulled snug and
bonded with clear dope around the perimeter
of the fabric section. The fabric is then wetted
with distilled water to remove fold creases, in
the same manner described for fabric panel areas. After the water has evaporated, a heavy
coat of low-viscosity clear dope is brushed
firmly through the fabric to soften the underlying dope pre-coat, insuring a good bond.
Brushing techniques should be accomplished
by moving the brush from one side across to
the opposite side to remove all air bubbles and
thoroughly saturate the fabric. This is indicated by the plywood grain being easily visible
through the translucent fabric. Except for very
small imperfections or small dents in the plywood surface, voids are not permissible between the fabric and plywood surfaces. Voids
may allow the fabric to balloon from the plywood surface, creating adverse handling characteristics.
b. After the first dope coat has dried at
°F,
least 1 hour at 70 a second heavy coat of
clear dope is applied by brush to fill the fabric
weave and prevent pinholes. The installation
of finish tape around the perimeter of the plywood surfaces, leading edges, and other wear
points, is optional but recommended for wear
and chafe protection. The application of aluminum-pigmented dope coating, sanding, and
finish coats will be the same as that specified
for fabric panel areas. Reinforcement grommets are not required on drain holes through
plywood surfaces.
