AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 4: REPAIRS TO FABRIC COVERING

2-45. DOPED-ON PATCH REPAIR. An
opening not over 8 inches in length in any direction, on an aircraft with a Vne speed less
than 150 mph, may be repaired with a 2-inch
overlapped and doped patch. The opening
should be trimmed to eliminate any irregular
edges and old pigmented dope coats removed
as described in paragraph 2-42.
a. When installing a fabric patch over a
small opening, the loose edge of the fabric
around the opening may be secured by extending a series of small threads, from the edge
across the opening, to the opposite side. After
the patch is completed, the threads may be
clipped and removed through an access port or
left in place.
b. The fabric patch is installed by applying a coat of clear dope around the opening,
then positioning the patch over the opening.
Brush out any void or wrinkles while saturating only the fabric overlap area. After the first
coat of clear dope around the edge has dried
°F,
1 hour at 70 wet the fabric patch to remove
any creases as described in paragraph 2-21.
After drying, apply additional coats of clear
dope and pigmented dope over the entire patch
as described in paragraph 2-21.
c. If the opening is less than 8 inches in
length in any direction and the aircraft Vne
speed is greater than 150 mph, a 2-inch wide
finishing tape should be installed on all sides,
centered on the edge of the 2-inch overlap
patch.
d. If the opening is more than 8 inches
but less than 16 inches in length, in any direction on an aircraft with a Vne speed less than
150 mph, it may be repaired with a doped
patch, which is overlapped 1/4 of the opening
maximum dimension. The maximum overlap
should not exceed 4 inches.
e. If the opening is more than 8 inches
but less than 16 inches in length in any direction, the repair is located on a wing top surface, and the aircraft Vne speed is greater than
150 mph, the patch overlap should be 4 inches
and a 2-inch wide finishing tape installed on
all sides, centered on the edge of the patch.
f. If the opening is more than 16 inches
in length in any direction and the Vne speed is
less than 150 mph, the patch overlap should be
4 inches and the finishing tape should be
4 inches in width, centered on the edge of the
patch.
g. If the opening is more than 16 inches
in length in any direction and the Vne speed is
greater than 150 mph, the patch overlap should
be 4 inches and the finishing tape should be
6 inches in width, centered on the edge of the
patch.
2-46.2-51.
[RESERVED.]
CHAPTER 3. FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS
SECTION 1. REPAIR OF LIGHT
