AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 2: APPLICATION OF DOPE

2-20. GENERAL. Nitrate dope and butyrate dope are manufactured by treating cellulose, derived from wood pulp or cotton linter
with select acids, then dissolving in a blend of
solvents and adding plasticizers for flexibility.
After a brush or spray application on fabric,
the film develops tension and strength as the
solvents evaporate. The tension and strength
will increase in proportion to the total film
thickness. The fabric functions as a film former and carries no load until a crack develops
in the dope film. An excessively-thick dope
film will develop too much tension and may
warp or damage a light airframe.
a. Viscosity adjustments for brush or
spray applications may also vary between
brands. When the viscosity adjustment ratio is
not provided or is unclear, the product manufacturer should be contacted for detailed instructions. If instructions cannot be obtained
or the source of the dope is unknown, the dope
should be considered suspect and its use is not
advised.
b. Dope, which has been stored for an
extended period of time or under adverse conditions, should be suspected of becoming
acidic and should be tested before being used
on cotton or linen fabric. In some cases, fresh
production dope has also been found to have a
high acid content and will begin to deteriorate
cotton or linen in a period of a few months.
The acid content of nitrate or butyrate dope
should not exceed 0.06 percent, calculated as
acidic acid. An acidity test can be performed
by most testing laboratories if high acid content is suspected.
c. Butyrate dope is superior to nitrate
dope in weather exposure tests. However, nitrate dope provides better adhesion to natural
fiber than butyrate dope. The adhesion of butyrate dope to natural fibers is adequate; it is
not necessary to use nitrate dope for the first
application and butyrate dope for all other applications. The presence of naphtha in nitrate
dope, manufactured in accordance with canceled Mil Specs formulas, causes nitrate dope
to be incompatible with butyrate dope; therefore, nitrate dope should not be applied over
butyrate dope for repairs or refinishing; however, butyrate dope may be applied over nitrate
dope.
NOTE: Nitrate or butyrate dope
thinners and retarders should not be
substituted for each other, nor should
automotive coating-type thinners be
used.
d. Clear dope produces the most tension
and strength. Aluminum-pigmented dope will
weigh slightly more than clear dope and develop less tension and strength for the same
film thickness. Pigmented color finishes will
produce the least tension and strength due to
the higher ratio of plasticizers.
e. During the coating-buildup procedure,
solvents released from each succeeding coat
will penetrate and be absorbed into the previous dope film, temporarily releasing the tension and increasing the drying time between
coats as the dope film becomes thicker. If
elapsed time between coats exceeds several
weeks at temperatures above 70 F, it is recommended that several spray coats of an appropriate dope thinner or dope with retarder
and/or rejuvenator added be applied to the
lightly-sanded, dried dope film to open the surface and provide cohesion for the next coat.
This will reduce the possibility of surface
cracks caused by dissimilar tension between
the old and new dope film.
f. All dope coats through the final finish
may be applied with a brush; however, brush
marks will be noticeable in the finish. With
increasing environmental concerns, high pressure airless and high-volume low-pressure
(HVLP) paint spray equipment is recommended over conventional siphon and pressure
pot spraying equipment. High pressure airless
and HVLP paint spraying equipment will
greatly reduce paint over-spray and fogging. A
spray gun, single coat is applied by overlapping each consecutive pass 50 percent of the
fan width. A double coat is applied by repeating the coating application in the same di90°€angle
rection, or at a to the first coat
(cross coat) before the first coat has flashed off
or dried dust free. For safety and helpful tips
for doping, see tables 2-3 and 2-4.
[TABLE 2-3] Safety tips for dope/paint.
SAFETY TIPS.
Always ground the aircraft structure while sanding and
painting.
Do not use an electric drill as a dope/paint mixer.
Wear leather-soled shoes in the dope/painting area.
Have an adequate, approved ventilation system.
Wear cotton clothes when doping or painting.
Wear an approved face mask or respirator when
spraying.
Follow all the manufacturer’s instructions.
[TABLE 2-4] Tips for doping.
HELPFUL TIPS FOR DOPING.
Limits for optimum application of dope: relative hu65° °F.
midity 20 to 60%; temperature range to 75
Drying time will vary with temperature, humidity,
amount of thinner used, and whether or not retarder
was added to the mixture.
Do not recoat until the surface is completely dry and
all active solvents have left the dope film.
Spray all coats except the first three or four clear
coats, to avoid brush marks.
Over thinning is preferred to under thinning.
Addition of retarder will produce a smoother coat, but
drying time between coats will be extended.
To get a clean line for the trim colors, apply a light
coat of clear dope directly on the masking tape prior
to painting. This will help eliminate the trim color
from running under the masking tape.
Remember to always bring the dope to room
temperature before using.
Rubbing compound and wax polish may be applied
after all solvents have escaped (usually 2 weeks,
depending upon the weather).
