AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 2: APPLICATION OF DOPE

2-23. COATING APPLICATION DEFECTS.
a. Blushing. The appearance of light
shaded dull areas on the surface as dope dries
is the result of moisture in the atmosphere
condensing on a surface due to the cooling effect of the fast-evaporating components of
dope thinner escaping from the coating.
Blushing can occur at any temperature when
the humidity is above 65 percent. There are
several ways to remedy this problem. The
drying time may be slowed by adding up to
1 quart of blush retarder to 1 gallon of dope or
by increasing the temperature of the dope room
and eliminating any cooling draft from blowing across the surface. Blushed surfaces may
be reworked by spraying several, closely-timed
coats of a 50/50 blend of blush retarder and
dope thinner to soften and return the dope surface to the original liquid state. Blush retarder,
mixed with dope, may delay the full drying
time by several days, but will eventually escape from the dope film if the room temperature is maintained an average of 70 °F.
b. Pinholes. Voids between the fabric
threads that are not filled with the first coats of
dope are called pinholes. They may be caused
by fabric contamination, such as oil or finger
prints, but are usually the result of improper
dope application. Pinholes are usually found
in a second layer of fabric such as finishing
tapes and reinforcing patches or over underlying, non-porous structures; such as leading
edges, turtle decks, and plywood surfaces.
Any non-porous structure under fabric will act
as a backstop and will resist complete dope
penetration into the fabric. Microscopic cavities between the backstop and fabric collect
escaping solvent vapors during the drying process and balloon up through the surface leaving pinholes, or become pinholes when the top
of the balloon is sanded. Moisture, in the fabric or on the backstop surface, also interferes
with complete dope penetration, resulting in
pinholes. The remedy for pinholes, at any
stage before the final finish coat, is to add
blush retarder to low viscosity dope and carefully brush over the affected surfaces to penetrate into and fill the pinholes. Discontinue
brushing after five or six strokes to avoid
leaving brush marks.
c. Orange Peel. A rough spray gunapplied finish, similar to the texture of an orange peel, may be caused by one or more of
the following conditions:
(1) Viscosity of material being sprayed
is too high.
(2) Air temperature is too high.
(3) Spraying in direct sunlight, onto a
hot surface or in a drafty/windy condition,
which causes a fast solvent evaporation.
(4) Spray gun, tip, cap, and/or needle
are not properly matched for the type material
being sprayed.
(5) Volume of air available from the
compressor not sufficient for spray gun.
(6) Wrong thinner used and drying too
fast.
(7) Spray gun not properly adjusted.
The spray gun should be adjusted to a uniform
spray pattern with the material atomized to deposit fine, wet particles that merge and form a
smooth film.
d. Blisters. One or more of the following
conditions my cause blisters:
(1) Freshly coated surface placed in hot
sunlight or high temperature area to accelerate
drying time, causing the vapor from rapidly
evaporating solvents to be trapped.
(2) Excessive high air pressure used to
spray heavy coats which “blasts” air bubbles
into the coating.
(3) Water or oil in air supply.
e. Runs, Sags, and Curtains. These defects may be caused by one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) Viscosity of material being sprayed
is too low.
(2) Coats applied too heavily.
(3) Insufficient drying time between
coats.
(4) Spray gun held too close to work
surface.
(5) Improperly adjusted spray gun.
f. Spray Gun Laps and Streaks. These
defects may be caused by one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) Spray gun not properly adjusted to
spray a wet, smooth surface.
(2) Overspray on a partially-dried surface.
(3) Spray pattern not sufficiently overlapped on each pass.
(4) Viscosity of material being sprayed
is too high.
(5) Metallic finishes sprayed too heavily allowing metallic pigments to move or flow
after deposit, causing a marbled appearance.
2-24.2-29.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 3. INSPECTION AND TESTING
