AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 1: PRACTICES AND PRECAUTIONS

2-13. FINISHING TAPE.
a. Finishing tape (surface tape) is installed after the fabric has been pulled taut
with the initial dope application. This procedure is performed to prevent ripples from
forming in fabric panels adjacent to newly applied tapes. Ripple formation is caused by the
inability of the combined tape and fabric to
tighten uniformly with adjacent fabric when
additional dope is applied.
b. In addition to the tape widths required to be installed over fabric seams specified in paragraph 2-7, finishing tape should be
installed as weather protection over all rib
lacing, screws, rivets, wire clips, or other devices used to secure fabric. This includes
wings, control surface ribs, empennage surface
ribs, and fuselage stringers, where so installed
by the original aircraft manufacturer. Tape
width should be sufficient to bond the fabric a
minimum of 3/8 inch on each side of all fabric
attachments. Two inch width tape is normally
used. Tapes over wing rib lacing should extend a minimum of 1/2 inch past each end of
any reinforcing tapes. Random or widelyspaced attachments may be covered by individual sections of fabric or finishing tape.
c. Installation of finishing tapes for additional wear resistance is recommended over
the edges of all fabric-forming structures. This
includes fuselage stringers, longerons, leading
and trailing edges, false or nose ribs, control
surfaces, and empennage ribs not already covered and protected by a finishing tape that is
required to be on a fabric seam or fabric attached to the structure. Compound surfaces,
such as wingtip bow and empennage surfaces,
are more conveniently taped using bias cut
finishing tape, which easily conforms to the
compound contour, rather than notching linear
cut tape to fit the surface. Bias cut tape will be
reduced to approximately two thirds the original cut width when pulled tight around a
wingtip bow and should be considered when
selecting the width of tape for the various locations.
d. Finishing tapes are applied by coating
the fabric surface over which the tape will be
applied with dope, applying the tape over the
wet dope film, then brushing the tape firmly
onto the fabric surface. This action will assure
a good bond by thoroughly saturating and wetting the finishing tape.
