AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 1: PRACTICES AND PRECAUTIONS

2-6. PREPARATION OF THE STRUCTURE FOR COVERING. One of the most
important items when covering aircraft is the
proper preparation of the structure. Before
covering, the airframe must be inspected and
approved by a FAA-certified mechanic or repair station.
[TABLE 2-1] Cotton and linen fabrics.
Minimum Minimum Minimum
Materials Specification Tensile Tearing
Strength New Strength New Strength Count Per Remarks
(undoped) (undoped) Deteriorated Inch
(ASTM D 1424) (undoped)
Airplane cloth TSO-C15d, as 80 pounds 5 pounds
mercerized amended, per inch warp
cotton references warp and fill.
(Grade “A”). Society
Automotive of 9 p.s.f. or
Engineers greater or
AMS 3806d, placard never
as amended or
MIL-C-5646 of 160 m.p.h.
Airplane cloth TSO-C14b, as 65 pounds 4 pounds
mercerized amended, per inch warp and
cotton. references and fill.
Society
Automotive
Engineers
AMS-3804c,
as amended.
Airplane cloth Society 50 pounds per 3 pounds
mercerized Automotive inch warp and and
cotton. Engineers fill.
AMS 3802, as
amended. the placarded
Aircraft linen. British 7F1.
a. Battery Box Treatment. An asphaltic,
rubber-based acid-proof coating should be applied to the structure in the area of a battery
box, by brush, for additional protection from
battery acid. Control cables routed in the area
of the battery box should be coated with
paralketone.
b. Worn Holes. Oversized screw holes or
worn size 4 self-tapping screw holes through
ribs and other structures used to attach fabric
may be redrilled a minimum 1-1/2 hole diameter distance from the original hole location
Tensile Thread Use and
For use on all
56 pounds 80 min., aircraft.
and fill. per inch. 84 max. Required on
warp and fill. aircraft with
wing loading
exceed speed
or greater.
For use on
warp 46 pounds per 80 min.,
aircraft with
fill. inch. 94 max.
wing loading
warp and fill.
less than
9 p.s.f. and
never exceed
speed of less
than
160 m.p.h.
For use on
warp 35 pounds per 110 max. gliders with
fill. inch. warp and fill. wing loading
of 8 p.s.f. or
less, provided
never-exceed
speed is 135
m.p.h. or less.
This material
meets the
minimum
strength
Requirements
of TSO-C15.
with a # 44 (0.086) drill bit. Size 6 screws,
drill bit size # 36 (0.1065), may be installed in
stripped or worn holes drilled for
size 4 screws, usually without redrilling. Worn
holes for wire clips and wire barbs should be
redrilled a minimum 1-1/2 hole distance from
the original locations using a drill jig to ensure
correct spacing, with the appropriate size drill
bit. Drill bit size # 30 (0.128) may be used to
redrill oversize holes for 1/8-inch diameter
blind rivets a minimum 1-1/2 hole diameter
distance from the original location.
[TABLE 2-2] Cotton and Linen, Tapes and Threads.
Minimum Yards Per
Materials Specification Yarn Size
Tensile Strength Pound
Reinforcing MIL-T-566 1 E,
150 pounds per
tape, cotton. Type 1
1/2 inch width.
MIL-Y-1140H
Lacing cord,
Federal T-C-57 40 pounds.
prewaxed
1F
braided cotton.
Lacing cord,
MIL-C-5648A 80 pounds.
braided cotton.
Lacing cord
MIL-T-5660B Ticket No. 62 pounds.
thread, high
10.
tenacity cotton.
Machine Federal V-T20/4 ply 5 pounds. 5,000 nominal. Use for all machine sewing.
thread cotton 276H
Hand-Sewing Federal V-T8/4 ply 14 pounds. 1,650 nominal. Use fully waxed thread.
thread cotton. 276H Type III B
Finishing
Same as fabric Same as fabric
(Surface) tape
used. used.
cotton.
c. Fairing Precautions. Aluminum
leading edge replacement fairings installed in
short sections may telescope during normal
spar bending loads or from thermal expansion
and contraction. This action may cause a
wrinkle to form in the fabric, at the edge of the
lap joint. Leading edge fairing sections may
be fastened together with rivets or screws to
prevent telescoping after installation. Trailing
edges should be adequately secured to prevent
movement and wrinkles.
d. Dope Protection. Solvents found in
nitrate and butyrate dope will penetrate, wrinkle, lift, or dissolve most one-part wood varnishes and one-part metal primers. All wood
surfaces that come in contact with doped fabric
should be treated with a protective coating
such as aluminum foil, cellulose tape, or dopeproof paint to protect them against the action
of the solvents in the dope. This can also be
accomplished by recoating with a suitable,
solvent resistant two-part epoxy varnish, which
will be impervious to solvent penetration and
damage after curing. Clad aluminum
Use and Remarks
Used as reinforcing tape on fabric and
under rib lacing cord. Strength of other
widths approx. in proportion.
Lacing fabric to structures. Unless
310 minimum.
already waxed, must be lightly waxed
before using.
Lacing fabric to structures. Unless
170 minimum.
already waxed, must be lightly waxed
before using.
Lacing fabric to structures. Unless
480 minimum.
already waxed, must be lightly waxed
before using.
Use for all hand-sewing.
Use over seams, leading edges, trailing
edges, outer edges and ribs, pinked,
raveled or straight edges.
and stainless steel parts need not be dopeproofed.
(1) A solvent-sensitive primer on ferrous metal and aluminum alloy components
which will be in contact with fabric may be
protected from solvent damage by overcoating
with a two-part epoxy primer. Epoxy primer
meeting MIL-P-53022B is acceptable.
(2) Small metal or wood surfaces, such
as rib caps, to which fabric will not be dope
bonded as a part of the particular fabric attachment procedure may be protected from
dope damage by cellophane tape or aluminum
foil.
e. Chafe Protection. Fabric and finishing
tape is often cut through with sandpaper over
sharp edges during the coating and finishing
procedure and later polishing. All sharp metal
edges or protruding screws, nails, rivets, and
bolt heads should be covered with an antichafe tape to prevent cutting and wearing
through the fabric after installation. Use
appropriate non-bleeding cotton adhesive
coated tape, finishing tape, or strips of fabric,
cut from the fabric being used to cover the aircraft, doped in place.
(1) Small holes cut through the fabric to
accommodate flying wires, control cables, and
fittings, must be reinforced with finishing tape
or fabric patches cut from the same fabric used
for the covering.
(2) Areas needing additional chafe protection such as control cables routed firm
against the fabric surface should be protected
with patches cut from cotton duck, leather, or
plastic. These patches may be sewn, doped, or
cemented in place, as appropriate.
(3) Any drag and anti-drag wires in the
wings should be protected from chafing at
cross points.
f. Inter-Rib Bracing. Use a woven fabric
tape of the same quality and width as that used
for the rib lace reinforcing, where so incorporated in the wing design by the original aircraft
manufacturer. When the original routing for
the inter rib bracing is not known, the tape will
be routed diagonally, alternating between the
top and bottom of each rib cap on each successive rib, if a single pair, half way between the
front and rear spars. The number of tape pairs
will duplicate the original aircraft manufacturer’s installation. Tapes will be routed continuously from the wing butt to the wingtip
bow, with one turn of tape around each intermediate rib cap strip. Care should be given to
position the tape so as not to interfere with
control cables, bellcranks or push-pull rods.
g. Preparation of Plywood Surfaces for
Covering. Prior to covering plywood surfaces, prepare the surface by sanding, cleaning,
and applying sealer and dope. When plywood
surfaces are to be covered with light weight
glass fiber deck cloth instead of fabric, no
sealer or dope should be applied to the plywood as it would inhibit penetration of epoxy
resin.
(1) Sand plywood surfaces as needed to
remove old loose dope or varnish residue to
provide a clean bonding surface. Remove any
oil, grease, or other contamination with a suitable solvent such as naphtha. Small, rough areas and irregularities in the plywood surface
and around any plywood repairs may be filled
and smoothed with an appropriate commercial
grade wood filler. Filling large warp depressions on plywood surfaces with a wood filler
for cosmetic purposes is not acceptable.
(2) After cleaning and sanding all plywood surfaces, seal the wood grain with a suitable solvent resistant two-part epoxy varnish.
After the varnish has thoroughly dried, apply
two brush or spray coats of clear dope, allowing sufficient drying time between coats.
