AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 2: APPLICATION OF DOPE

2-21. DOPE APPLICATION PROCEDURE (Natural Fabrics).
a. Step 1. After the cotton or linen fabric
is installed in accordance with the procedures
specified in paragraphs 2-7 and 2-8, the fabric
is wetted with distilled water to remove wrinkles and fold creases, which will show in a
gloss finish. Water may be applied by rubbing
with a clean sponge or rag, or by using a paint
spray gun. Do not use tap water. It may contain minerals which will contaminate the fabric.
(1) As water is absorbed by the fibers,
the threads swell, resulting in temporary
tauting of the fabric panel. The fabric should
be allowed to dry before dope application, otherwise the water in the fibers will interfere
with the dope penetration and adhesion.
(2) After the fabric has dried, the first
coat of dope is applied, brushing in one direction to set the nap with a clean, non-shedding,
2-to 6-inch wide, semi-soft, long bristle paint
brush.
(3) To offset the deteriorating effect of
mildew or other fungus on natural fibers, especially in damp climates, it is recommended that
a fungicide be added to the first coat of dope.
The preferred fungicide is zinc dimethyldithiocarbamate powder, which should be prepared
per the manufacturer’s instructions. If no
manufacturer’s instructions are available the
zinc powder may be stirred in at a ratio of
4 ounces, to one gallon of un-thinned nitrate or
butyrate dope, after the powder is wetted to a
paste with a 50/50 ratio of dope and thinner.
(4) Pre-mixed fungicidal dope, manufactured in accordance with the formula specified in MIL-D-7850, will have a transparent
purple tint to indicate the fungicide additive.
Dope manufactured with other colors to
identify the manufacturers’ products sold under proprietary trade names may or may not
have a fungicidal additive.
(5) The viscosity of the dope should be
adjusted to uniformly wet the fabric, indicated
by the fabric becoming translucent so that it
penetrates through the fabric but does not drip
or run down the opposite side. Any dope-runs
or pooling on the opposite side will shrink and
distort the fabric, and may be visible on the
finished surface.
(6) The ideal temperature for application
of dope or other coatings is 65 to 75 F and the
humidity should be less than 65 percent. As a
general rule, each 10 F increase or decrease in
ambient temperature will increase or decrease
drying time by 100 percent. Dope should be
allowed to warm to room temperature prior to
attempting to adjust the viscosity.
b. Step 2. Depending upon the quality of
the dope and the ratio of thinning, the fabric
should start to become taut after the first
brushed coat of dope has dried approximately
°F.
1 hour at 70 A second, heavier coat is ap90°F=to
plied by cross brushing at the first
coat. Viscosity should be adjusted only as
necessary to brush out a heavy uniform coat.
If the fabric is not taut, with all sag removed,
after the second coat has dried approximately
2 hours, a third coat may be applied.
c. Step 3. After the fabric has become
semi-taut and stabilized with the initial dope
application, and the rib lacing and other fabric
attachments are completed as detailed in paragraphs 2-9 through 2-12, it is ready for
“dressing out” as described in paragraphs 2-13
and 2-14.
d. NOTE: “Dressing out” means applying
all the finishing tapes, reinforcing patches, inspection access ports, and drain grommets, etc.
Par 2-21
e. Step 4. After the covering is a dressed
out, one or more coats of clear dope are
brushed over all finishing tapes and fabric reinforcing patches. This will balance the thickness of the dope film with the previously
coated areas of the fabric. It is very important
that the porosity of the fabric be filled while
brushing to avoid pinholes showing in the finish.
f. Step 5. After drying at least 2 hours at
°F,
70 a third heavy coat of clear dope is applied over the entire surface, preferably with a
paint spray gun if brush marks are to be
avoided. After the third coat of dope has dried
°F,
at least 2 hours at 70 the fabric should be
taut and the dope film should show a gloss,
depending upon the dope quality and the ratio
of thinner added. If not, a fourth coat of clear
dope may be applied, in the same manner as
the third coat.
NOTE: Three to four clear coats of
dope film showing a uniform gloss
combined with the aluminumpigmented coats and finish coats is
considered satisfactory for light aircraft up to 9 lb. per square foot wing
loading. Five to eight clear coats, depending upon the quality of the dope
and resulting film thickness, are recommended for higher wing loading
aircraft to assure the covering does
not stretch and lose tension.
g. Step 6. After the clear coats are found
to be satisfactory, two heavy cross-coats of
aluminum-pigmented dope are applied with a
spray gun to provide protection from ultraviolet (UV) rays. Tests have shown that UV radiation will deteriorate cotton, linen, and polyester fabric; however, polyester fabric deteriorates at a rate half that of cotton or linen under
identical exposure conditions. UV radiation
Page 2-27
does not deteriorate glass fabric. Aluminumpigmented dope blocks UV radiation and provides a sanding base. A gauge of ultraviolet
protection in the field is to block all visible
light from penetrating through the fabric.
Drying time between the two coats should be
°F.
at least 1 hour at 70
(1) An option to premixed aluminum
dope is to use aluminum-pigment paste. Aluminum paste should be prepared per the manufacturer’s instructions. If no manufacturer’s
instructions are available, mix 3 ounces (by
weight), of 325-mesh aluminum-pigment
paste, to 1 gallon of unthinned, clear dope.
The aluminum paste should first be mixed to a
cream consistency with a 50/50 ratio of dope
and thinner before mixing into the unthinned
clear dope. A higher ratio of aluminumpigment added to the dope may cause a loss of
primer-coat and finish-coat adhesion, and
peeling may occur especially when high tack
tape is used to mask for the trim colors and
registration numbers.
(2) The viscosity of the mixed aluminum-pigmented dope should be adjusted for
satisfactory spray gun application.
h. Step 7. After two coats of aluminumpigmented dope have dried at least 4 hours at
°F,
70 the surface may be wet sanded with
# 280 grit (or finer) waterproof sandpaper. The
aluminum-pigmented dope should be sanded
only to develop a smooth surface, not sanded
completely off to the clear dope undercoats.
Do not sand over screwheads, rib lacing, or
any structural sharp edges that will quickly cut
through fabric and require patching. Additional coats of aluminum-pigmented dope may
be applied and sanded, depending on the final
finish desired. The last coat should not be
sanded to assure ultraviolet
protection along the edges of the finishing
tapes and reinforcing patches is maintained.
i. Step 8. Three coats of pigmented color
finish are applied with a paint spray gun, allowing adequate drying time between coats.
The color finish may be wet sanded between
coats, if desired, with a fine grit waterproof
sandpaper. Adding blush retarder to the final
dope finish will improve the gloss. After drying several weeks, a rubbing compound may
be used to buff the finish and increase the
gloss. A periodic application of a wax polish
will help protect the finish from the weather
and environmental pollution.
NOTE: Drain holes should be opened
soon after all finishing is complete to
insure drainage and to aid ventilation
of the structure.
(1) When exposed to the sun, dark colors absorb more sun energy and convert that
energy to heat more easily than light colors.
High temperatures dry out wood structures and
deteriorate organic materials in an aircraft
structure. Preferably the lighter color shades
are applied first and then overcoated with
darker trim and registration number colors.
(2) Only high-quality, solvent-resistant
crepe paper or polypropylene masking tape
should be used to avoid finish bleed under the
tape edge. Newspaper printing ink may transfer to a fresh finish and should not be used for
masking paper. Plastic sheeting should not be
used as a dust cover on a fresh finish due to
possible bonding and damage.
