AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 3: INSPECTION AND TESTING

2-30. GENERAL. All components of the
covering should be inspected for general condition. Loose finishing tape and reinforcing
patches; chafing under fairings; brittle, cracking, peeling, or deteriorated coatings; fabric
tears and rock damage; broken or missing rib
lacing; and rodent nests are unacceptable. The
entire fabric covering should be uniformly taut
with no loose or wrinkled areas, or excess tension which can warp and damage the airframe.
a. Excess Tension. There are no methods
or specifications for measuring acceptable fabric tension other than observation. Excess tension may warp critical components, such as
longerons, wing rib, and trailing edges out of
position, weakening the airframe structure.
(1) Excess tension with cotton, linen,
and glass fiber fabric covering is usually
caused by excessive dope film on a new covering, or continuous shrinking of an originally
satisfactory dope film as the plasticizers migrate from the dope with age. Heat from sun
exposure accelerates plasticizer migration.
(2) Excess tension with polyester fabric,
coated with dope, is usually caused by the
combined tension of the heat tautened polyester fabric and continuous shrinking of the dope
film as the plasticizers migrate from the dope
with age.
b. Loose Fabric. Fabric that flutters or
ripples in the propeller slipstream, balloons, or
is depressed excessively in flight from the
static position, is unacceptable.
(1) Loose or wrinkled cotton, linen, and
glass fabric covering may be caused by inadequate dope film; poor quality dope; fabric installed with excess slack; or by a bent, broken,
or warped structure.
(2) Loose or wrinkled polyester fabric
covering, finished with coatings other than
dope, may be caused by inadequate or excessive heat application; excess slack when the
fabric was installed; or bent or warped structure. Polyester fabric which does not meet aircraft quality specifications will very likely become loose after a short period of time.
(3) Glass fabric covering should be
tested with a large suction cup for rib lacing
cord failure and reinforcing tape failure caused
by chafing on all wing ribs and other structural
attachments throughout the airframe. Particular attention should be given to the area within
the propeller slipstream. If failure is indicated
by the covering lifting from the static position,
the rib lacing cord and reinforcing tape must
be reinstalled with double the number of original laces.
NOTE: Temporary wrinkles will develop in any fabric coated and finished with dope, when moisture from
rain, heavy fog, or dew is absorbed
into a poor-quality dope film, causing
the film to expand. Temporary wrinkles may also develop with any type of
thick coatings, on any type of fabric,
when an aircraft is moved from a cold
storage area to a warm hangar or
parked in the warming sunshine,
causing rapid thermal expansion of
the coating.
c. Coating Cracks. Fabric exposed
through cracks in the coating may be initially
tested for deterioration by pressing firmly with
a thumb to check the fabric’s strength. Natural
fibers deteriorate by exposure to ultraviolet radiation, mildew, fungus from moisture, high
acid-content rain, dew, fog, pollution, and age.
Polyester filaments will deteriorate by exposure to UV radiation.
(1) Glass fabric will not deteriorate
from UV exposure, but will be deteriorated by
acid rain, dew fallout, and chaffing if loose in
the prop blast area.
(2) Cotton, linen, and glass fabric coverings are dependent solely on the strength and
tautening characteristics of the dope film to
carry the airloads. Dope coatings on heattautened polyester fabric will also absorb all
the airloads because the elongation of polyester filaments are considerably higher than the
dope film. Polyester fabric that is coated with
materials other than dope, is dependent solely
on the heat tautening and low-elongation characteristics of the polyester filaments to develop
tension and transmit the airloads to the airframe without excess distortion from a static
position.
(3) Cracks in coatings will allow any
type of exposed fabric to deteriorate. Cracks
should be closed by sealing or removing the
coatings in the immediate area and replace
with new coatings, or recover the component.
