AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 2: FABRIC COVERING  Section 4: REPAIRS TO FABRIC COVERING

2-44. SEWN-PATCH REPAIR. Openings
that cannot be repaired by closing with stitches
may be repaired by sewing in a new fabric
section. The edges of the fabric around the
opening should be trimmed straight on four
sides to facilitate the installation of straight
sections of finishing tape over the stitches.
a. After cutting out the damaged section
and removing the coatings as detailed in paragraph 2-42, the new fabric section should be
sized to allow folding both edges of the fabric
back 1/2-inch to increase the stitch tear resistance. Temporarily attach the four corners in
position with thread. Start with a double
thread with a square knot at the end (see figure 2-14) and continue stitching in the manner
described in figures 2-13 and 2-14. When the
stitching is complete, wet the new fabric section as described in paragraph 2-21 to remove
any creases. After drying, apply one coat of
clear dope on the new fabric, as described in
paragraph 2-21. When the first coat of dope
°F,
has dried 1 hour at 70 apply a 3-inch wide
finishing tape, centered over the stitches. The
finishing tape should be well saturated with
Step 1. Tie the thread ends together with a
square knot.
Step 2. Start the stitch by routing through the
loop, positioning the square knot on the inside.
Step 3. Complete the hand-stitch and secure the
stitching with a half hitch at a maximum each
10 stitches.
[FIG 2-14] Hand-stitch detail.
dope and smoothed out with no voids or wrinkles. Additional coats of clear dope and pigmented dope are then applied to obtain the desired tautness and finish, as described in paragraph 2-21.
b. If the opening is more than 8 inches
but less than 16 inches long in any direction,
the finishing tape should be 4 inches wide.
c. The finishing tape width should be
6 inches wide if the opening is over 16 inches
long in any direction, is located on a wing top
surface, or the aircraft Vne speed is greater
than 150 mph.
