AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 1: REPAIR OF LIGHT LOAD LAMINATE STRUCTURES

3-2. FIBERGLASS LAMINATE REPAIRS. The following repairs are applicable
to fiberglass laminate used for non-structural
fairing, covers, cowlings, honeycomb panel
facings, etc. Prior to undertaking the repair,
remove any paint by using normal dry sanding
methods. Bead blasting may be used but caution must be exercised not to abrade the surfaces excessively.
NOTE: Chemical paint strippers
must not be used.
NOTE: These repairs are not to be
used on radomes or advanced composite components, such as graphite
(carbon fiber) or Kevlar.
CAUTION: Sanding fiberglass laminates gives off a fine dust that may
cause skin and/or respiratory irritation unless suitable skin and respiration protection is used. Sanding also
creates static charges that attract dirt
or other contaminants.
a. Check for voids and delamination by
tap testing. (See chapter 5.) When the surface
of a fiberglass laminated structure is scratched,
pitted, or eroded; first wash with detergent and
water to remove all of the dirt, wax, or oxide
film. Then scrub the surface with an acceptable cleaner. After the surface is thoroughly
cleaned, sand it with 280-grit sandpaper, and
again use an acceptable cleanser to remove any
sanding residue and moisture. This is
essential, as any moisture remaining on the
surface will inhibit the cure of the resin. Dry
the fiberglass laminate thoroughly prior to
bonding repair. Mix enough resin, using the
manufacturer’s instructions, to completely
cover the damaged area, and apply one or two
coats. Cover the resin with a peel ply to exclude all air from the resin while it is curing.
After the resin has cured, remove the film and
file or sand the surface to conform to the original shape of the part. Ensure that all edges of
the laminate part are sealed to prevent water
absorption. Then refinish it to match the rest
of the structure.
b. Superficial scars, scratches, surface
abrasion, or rain erosion can generally be repaired by applying one or more coats of a suitable low temperature resin, catalyzed to cure at
room temperature, to the abraded surface. The
number of coats required will depend upon the
type of resin and the severity of the damage.
(1) Damage not exceeding the first layer
or ply of fiberglass laminate can be repaired by
filling with a putty consisting of a compatible
room-temperature-setting resin and clean short
glass fibers. Before the resin sets, apply a
sheet of peel ply over the repair area and work
out any bubbles and excess resin. After the
resin has cured, sand off any excess and prepare the area for refinishing.
(2) Damage deep enough to seriously
affect the strength of the laminate (usually
more than the first ply or layer of fabric) may
be repaired as illustrated in figure 3-1. Coat
the sanded area with room-temperature-setting
resin and apply contoured pieces of glass fabric soaked in resin. Apply a peel ply sheet
over the repair and work out any bubbles and
excess resin. After the resin has cured, scrape
off the excess resin and sand the surface of the
repair to the original contour.
[FIG 3-1] Typical laminate (facing) repair.
(3) Damage that extends completely
through one facing and into the core requires
the replacement of the damaged core and facing. A method for accomplishing this type of
repair is shown in figure 3-2. An alternate
method for repairing the facing is shown in
figure 3-3. The damaged portion is carefully
trimmed out to a circular or oval shape and the
core material is removed completely to the opposite facing. Exercise caution so as not to
damage the opposite facing or to start delamination between the facings and the core around
the damage.
[FIG 3-2] Typical core and facing repair.
[FIG 3-3] Typical stepped joint repair.
c. Use replacement core stock of the
same material and density as the original (or an
acceptable substitute) and cut it to fit snugly in
the trimmed hole. Observe the direction of the
original core. When all of the pieces of replacement facing laminations are cut and
soaked in resin, coat all surfaces of the hole
and the scarfed area with resin. Then coat all
surfaces of the core replacement with resin and
insert it into the hole. After all of the pieces of
resin-impregnated glass-fabric facing are in
place and lined up with the original fiber-orientation, cover the entire area with a
piece of peel ply and carefully work down the
layers of fabric to remove any air bubbles and
excess resin. Apply light pressure by means of
sand bags or a vacuum bag. When the resin
has cured, sand the repair to match the original
contour and refinish the surface.
