AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 3: TRANSPARENT PLASTICS

3-23. FORMING METHODS. (See table 3-1.)
a. Simple Curve Forming. Heat the
plastic material to the recommended temperature, remove it from the heat source, and carefully drape it over the prepared form. Carefully press the hot plastic to the form and either hold or clamp the sheet in place until it
cools. This process may take from ten minutes
to one-half hour. Do not force-cool it.
b. Compound-Curve Forming. This
type of forming is normally used for such parts
as canopies or complex wingtip light covers,
and it requires a great deal of specialized
equipment. There are four commonly used
methods, each having its advantages and disadvantages.
c. Stretch Forming. Preheated acrylic
sheets are stretched mechanically over the
form in much the same way as is done with the
simple curved piece. Special care must be
taken to preserve uniform thickness of the
material, since some parts will have to stretch
more than others.
[TABLE 3-1] Typical temperatures for forming acrylic sheets.
Thickness of sheet (in.) 0.125
Type of forming Regular acrylic
MIL-P-6886 MIL-P-8184
°C °F °C °F °C °F °C °F
Simple curve 113 235
Stretch forming
(dry mold cover) 140 284
Male and female forming 140 284
Vacuum forming without
form 140 284
Vacuum forming with
female form 145 293
d. Male And Female Die Forming. This
requires expensive matching male and female
dies. The heated plastic sheet is placed between the dies which are then mated. When
the plastic cools, the dies are opened.
e. Vacuum-Forming Without Forms.
Many aircraft canopies are formed by this
method. In this process a clamp with an
opening of the desired shape is placed over a
vacuum box and the heated sheet of plastic is
clamped in place. When the air in the box is
evacuated, the outside air pressure will force
the hot plastic through the opening and form
the concave canopy. It is the surface tension of
the plastic that shapes the canopy.
f. Vacuum-Forming With A Female
Form. If the shape needed is other than that
which would be formed by surface tension, a
female mold, or form must be used. It is
placed below the plastic sheet and the vacuum
pump is connected. When air from the form is
evacuated, the outside air pressure will force
the hot plastic sheet into the mold and fill it.
g. Sawing And Drilling.
(1) Several types of saws can be used
with transparent plastics, however circular
saws are the best for straight cuts. The blades
0.250 0.125 0.250
Heat-resistant acrylic plastic,
plastic. MIL-P-5425, and craze-resistant acrylic plastic,
110 230 135 275 135 275
135 275 160 320 150 302
135 275 180 356 170 338
135 275 150 302 145 293
140 284 180 356 170 338
should be hollow-ground or have some set to
prevent binding. After the teeth are set, they
should be side-dressed to produce a smooth
edge on the cut. Band saws are recommended
for cutting flat acrylic sheets when the cuts
must be curved or where the sheet is cut to a
rough dimension to be trimmed later. Close
control of size and shape may be obtained by
band sawing a piece to within 1/16 inch of the
desired size, as marked by a scribed line on the
plastic, and then sanding it to the correct size
with a drum or belt sander.
(2) Unlike soft metal, acrylic plastic is a
very poor conductor of heat. Make provisions
for removing the heat when drilling. Deep
holes need cooling, and a water-soluble cutting
oil is a satisfactory coolant since it has no tendency to attack the plastic.
(a) The drill used on acrylics must be
carefully ground and free from nicks and burrs
that would affect the surface finish. Grind the
drill with a greater included angle than would
be used for soft metal. The rake angle should
be zero in order to scrape, not cut. (See figure 3-18.)
[FIG 3-18] Drill having an included angle of
150°,
approximately used to drill acrylic plastics.
(b) The patented Unibit (see figure 3-19) is good for drilling small holes in
aircraft windshields and windows. It can cut
1/2−inch 1/32−inch
holes from 1/8-to in increments and produces good smooth holes
with no stress cracks around their edges.
[FIG 3-19] Unibit drill for drilling acrylic plastics.
h. Polymerizable Cements. Polymerizable cements are those in which a catalyst is
added to an already thick monomerpolymer
syrup to promote rapid hardening. Cement PS-30 and Weld-On 40 are polymerizable cements of this type. They are suitable
for cementing all types of PLEXIGLAS acrylic
cast sheet and parts molded from PLEXIGLAS
molding pellets. At room temperature, the
cements harden (polymerize) in the container
in about 45 minutes after mixing the components. They will harden more rapidly at higher
temperatures. The cement joints are usually
hard enough for handling within 4 hours after
assembly. The joints may be machined within
4 hours after assembly, but it is better to wait
24 hours.
(1) PS-30 and Weld-On 40 joints retain
excellent appearance and color stability after
outdoor exposure. These cements produce
clear, transparent joints and should be used
when the color and appearance of the joints are
important.
(2) PS-30 and Weld-On 40 should be
°F.
used at temperatures no lower than 65 If
°F,
cementing is done in a room cooler than 65
it will require a longer time to harden and the
joint strength will be reduced.
(a) The cement should be prepared
with the correct proportions of components as
given in the manufacturer’s instructions and
thoroughly mixed, making sure neither the
mixing container nor mixing paddle adds color
or affects the hardening of the cement.
Clean glass or polyethylene mixing containers
are preferred.
(b) Because of their short pot life
(approximately 45 minutes) Cement PS-30 and
Weld-On 40 must be used quickly once the
components are mixed. Time consumed in
preparation shortens the effective working
time, making it necessary to have everything
ready to be cemented before the cements are
mixed. For better handling pour cement
within 20 minutes of mixing.
(c) For maximum joint strength, the
final cement joint should be free of bubbles. It
will usually be sufficient to allow the mixed
cement to stand for 10 minutes before cementing to allow bubbles to rise to the surface.
(See figure 3-20.)
[FIG 3-20] Applying pressure to acrylic plastics.
(d) The gap joint technique can only
be used with colorless PLEXIGLAS acrylic or
in cases in which joints will be hidden. If inconspicuous joints in colored PLEXIGLAS
acrylic are needed, the parts must be fitted
closely, using closed V groove, butt, or arc
joints.
(3) Cement forms or dams may be made
with masking tape as long as the adhesive surface does not contact the cement. This
is easily done with a strip of cellophane tape
placed over the masking tape adhesive. The
tape must be chosen carefully. The adhesive
on ordinary cellophane tape prevents the cure
of PS-30 and Weld-On 40. Before actual fabrication of parts, sample joints should be tried
to ensure that the tape system used will not
harm the cement. Since it is important for all
of the cement to remain in the gap, only contact pressure should be used.
(4) Bubbles will tend to float to the top
of the cement bead in a gap joint after the cement is poured. These cause no problem if the
bead is machined off. A small wire (not copper), or similar objects may be used to lift
some bubbles out of the joint; however, the
cement joint should be disturbed as little as
possible.
(5) Polymerizable cements shrink as the
cement hardens. Therefore, the freshly poured
cement bead should be left above the surfaces
being cemented to compensate for the shrinkage. If it is necessary for appearances, the
bead may be machined off after the cement has
set.
