AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 1: REPAIR OF LIGHT LOAD LAMINATE STRUCTURES

3-3. REPAIRING HOLES.
a. Scarf Method. If the damaged area is
less than 3 inches in diameter, the damage may
be removed by either sanding with a power
sander or hand sanding with 180-grit
sandpaper.
(1) Scarf back the edges of the hole
about 50 times the thickness of the face ply.
Thoroughly clean out all of the sanding residue
with a cloth wet with an acceptable cleanser.
(2) Prepare the patches by (see figure 3-4) laying the proper weight fiberglass
cloth impregnated with resin on a piece of peel
ply. A weight of resin equal to the weight of
the patch provides a 50-percent ratio.
[FIG 3-4] Preparing the fiberglass sandwich.
(3) Make a sandwich by laying a second
layer of peel ply over the patch before cutting
it to the required size and shape. Sandwiching
will prevent the patch from raveling when cut.
Brush a good coat of resin over the scarfed
area. Remove one piece of peel ply from the
first patch and lay the patch in place. Work all
of the air out of the resin and remove the top
peel ply. Cut the next larger patch so it will
overlap the first patch by at least one-half inch.
Remove one piece of peel ply from this patch
and center the patch over the first one. Work
all of the air out of the resin. Continue laying
in patches, each overlapping the one below it
by at least one-half inch, until you have the required number of layers (see figures 3-5
and 3-6) plus an extra ply to restore original
strength to the repaired area.
[FIG 3-5] Scarfed repair to a nonstructural laminated
fiberglass component.
[FIG 3-6] Symmetrical layup same as original number of plies, plus one extra ply.
(4) Cover the entire repair with peel ply
and carefully work out all of the air bubbles
from the resin. Apply pressure over the repair
with tape or sandbags and allow it to cure.
After the repair has cured, remove the excess
resin by filing or sanding the surface to the
contour of the original part. Smooth the surface with fine sandpaper and refinish it to
match the original part.
(5) An alternate layup method that
works equally well is to place the larger patch
over the scarfed area first, and then each subsequent smaller patch over this. Both types of
repair are finished in exactly the same way.
(6) The scarfed joint method (see figure 3-7) is normally used on small punctures
up to 3 or 4 inches in maximum dimension and
in facings that are made of thin fabric that is
difficult to peel.
b. Step-Joint Method. The scarf method
of repairing a laminated fiberglass face sheet
of a honeycomb structure is the easiest method
to use. In this type of repair, the damage is
outlined with a compass. If a square or rectangular repair is more appropriate then the damage is outlined using a straight-edge and a
compass to round out the corners.
[FIG 3-7] Typical scarf joint repair.
(1) The configuration of the repair
should be that which will remove the least
amount of sound material. Extend the
cleaned-out area for a distance equal to the
number of plies to be removed, less 1 inch.
For example, if you must remove three plies,
extend the repair for 2 inches beyond the
cleaned-out area. Each layer should be 1 inch
beyond the layer below. Use a sharp knife or
other type of cutter to cut through the top layer,
being careful not to damage the underneath
layer. Use several passes with the knife rather
than one deep cut. (See figure 3-8.)
(2) Begin with one corner of the patch
and carefully pry it loose and peel it up until
all of the layer is removed. Next, mark the exposed layer 1/2 inch inside the opening and
carefully cut and remove it. Continue until
you have removed all of the damaged or delaminated layers.
[FIG 3-8] Carefully cut through each layer of fiberglass cloth and remove it from the damaged area.
(3) Lightly sand, then scrub the entire
area with an acceptable cleanser. Prepare the
patches exactly as you did for the scarf
method, cutting each layer to exactly the size
of the material removed. Brush in a coat of
resin, lay in the patch of the smallest size, and
carefully work out all of the air bubbles from
the resin. Now, lay in the next larger size
patch to lock the first layer of fiberglass cloth
into place. Repeat the process until the damage area is filled.
(4) Butt the top layer of cloth to the
opening in the face ply and cover the entire repair with peel ply. Carefully work all of the air
bubbles out of the resin and put pressure on the
repair with either sandbags, or another appropriate method, such as vacuum bagging. (See
figure 3-9.) After the top repair has hardened,
repeat the process on the bottom.
