AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 1: REPAIR OF LIGHT LOAD LAMINATE STRUCTURES

3-4. SAMPLE BAGGING AND CURING
PROCESS. Figure 3-9 shows a typical bagging arrangement for a localized repair in
which patch plies of prepreg are cured with a
layer of adhesive, and a heating blanket is used
to supply heat.
[FIG 3-9] Sample bagging layup cross section.
a. The materials used for most bonded
repairs require elevated temperatures and pressure, during their cure, to develop full strength.
The following paragraphs describe the operations required to enclose the repair in a vacuum bag. When the part to be cured can be
placed in an autoclave, additional pressure and
heat can be applied. For cured-in-place parts,
vacuum pressure and portable heat blankets
usually suffice.
(1) When selecting materials, especially
the parting agent film, the temperature at
which the repair is to be cured must be known.
Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) film is ideal when the
bonding temperature does not exceed 250 °F.
PVA film has very high tear resistance and may
be heat-sealed effectively. When the bond
temperature is not above 180 °F, polyvinyl
chloride film can be used. For temperatures up
to 450 °F, a polyvinyl fluoride film is used.
These three types of films are available in a variety of weights and widths. Most nylon bagging films are used for temperatures up to
400 °F.
(2) When all repair details are in place
and ready to be cured, they are enclosed in a
bag of plastic film or thin rubber. Air is removed from the bag by a vacuum source so
that atmospheric pressure exerts a pressure on
the repair as it is cured.
(3) To provide a path to draw off the air
initially inside the bag, layers of fiberglass
cloth or similar noncontaminating materials,
known as breather plies, are placed inside the
bag. When prepreg is being cured as part of
the repair, it is sometimes necessary to bleed
off excess resin. To do this, layers of fiberglass cloth or similar materials known as
bleeder plies are placed over the prepreg.
Some repairs have been made with a net resin
prepreg that does not require bleeding, and
therefore does not require bleeder plies. Porous separator plies or film are used between
the prepreg and the bleeder and nonporous
separator plies or film are used between the
bleeder and breather plies to control the flow
of resin.
(4) Small parts may be envelope bagged
(i.e., enclosing the entire part in the bag).
Larger parts with localized repairs can be
bagged by sealing the surface completely
around the repair areas with sealing tape and
applying the bagging material to the sealing
tape.
CAUTION: The whole panel must be
vacuum bagged to prevent delamination in sandwich skins when using an
oven or autoclave. Contoured parts
must be restrained with tooling to
prevent warpage.
b. When the heat for curing the repair
is provided by a heat blanket, the blanket can
be either inside or outside the vacuum bag.
However, the blanket should be covered to
minimize heat loss, and the blanket should be
separated from direct contact with most bagging materials by layers of fiberglass cloth.
(1) This will prevent localized overheating that could damage the bag. It is sometimes helpful to place a thin aluminum sheet
under the heating blanket to minimize localized heating. A thin rubber blanket can help
smooth the surface of the material being cured.
A pressure plate should be used when two or
more heat blankets are applied to the same repair.
NOTE: Understanding that various
resins behave differently during cure,
the choice of bagging arrangements
will often vary with the material being
cured.
(2) The procedure for the bagging arrangement is as follows:
(a) Place a peel ply over the patch
material to provide a surface finish for subsequent bonding or painting if not previously accomplished. Place a layer of porous separator
cloth over the patch, extending beyond the
prepreg and the adhesive. Smooth to avoid
wrinkles.
(b) With the patch material in place,
place the end of the thermocouple wire next to
the edge of the prepreg. Tape the wire to the
structure inside the bag with heat-resistant
tape. The tape should not be in contact with
the prepreg or the adhesive.
(c) Place bleeder plies as shown, extending 2 to 3 inches beyond the patch. The
number of bleeder plies needed will vary with
the type of resin and the resin content required.
(d) Place a layer of nonporous parting film over the bleeder plies, cut 1 inch
smaller than the bleeder plies. This layer is
intended to stop resin flow from bleeder plies
into breather plies while still providing an airflow path when vacuum is applied.
(e) If a pressure plate is used, place it
over the previous separator ply. The plate is
frequently perforated with small holes to permit airflow to the breather plies. Bleeder plies
may be necessary when using a pressure plate.
NOTE: Pressure on the repair will be
reduced if the pressure plate does not
conform to the repair.
(f) Place the heat blanket over the assembly, making sure it extends 3 to 4 inches
beyond the material to be cured.
(g) One or more thermocouples
should be in contact with the heat blanket to
monitor its temperature. Additional thermocouples should be placed near the curing repair
to monitor the temperature of the curing resin.
(h) When using a heat blanket as the
heat source, four to six layers of fiberglass surface breather or the equivalent should be
used over the heat blanket. This will insulate
and prevent damage to the nylon bagging film.
Ensure that the breather plies are in contact
with the bleeder plies so that an air passage
exists.
(i) Place a bead of sealing tape
against the parent material around the edge of
the breather plies. Seal the thermocouple
wires to prevent vacuum leakage.
NOTE: Two layers of sealing tape
may be required in order to provide a
good seal.
(j) Cover with a suitable vacuum
bag, smoothed to minimize wrinkles. Press
the bag firmly onto the sealing tape to obtain
an air-tight seal. Place pleats in vacuum bag to
allow the bag material to stretch.
(k) Install two vacuum probes or
sniffers through openings cut in the bag. One
will be used for the vacuum gauge and the
other will be connected to the vacuum source.
The vacuum probe must sit on the breather
plies, but must not touch the patch or adhesive.
NOTE: Place the vacuum gauge on
the opposite side of the vacuum port,
where applicable. Do not place vacuum probes near repair area.
(l) Connect the vacuum source and
smooth the bag by hand pressure as the air is
removed. Check for leaks and reseal as necessary. A minimum vacuum of 22 inches of
mercury is required.
(m) Place insulating material over
the vacuum bag to prevent heat loss.
(n) Apply power to the heat blanket
and control its temperature as specified for the
material being cured.
(o) Observe cure time requirements
established by the product manufacturer.
3-5.3-9.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 2. METALLIC SANDWICH
