AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 3: TRANSPARENT PLASTICS

3-24. REPAIR OF PLASTICS. Replace,
rather than repair extensively damaged transparent plastic, whenever possible, since even a
carefully patched part is not the equal of a new
section, either optically or structurally. At the
first sign of crack development, drill a small
hole with a # 30 or a 1/8-inch drill at the extreme ends of the cracks as shown in figure 3-21. This serves to localize the cracks
and to prevent further splitting by distributing
the strain over a large area. If the cracks are
small, stopping them with drilled holes will
usually suffice until replacement or more permanent repairs can be made. The following
repairs are permissible; however, they are not
to be located in the pilot’s line of vision during
landing or normal flight.
[FIG 3-21] Stop-drilling cracks.
a. Surface Patch. If a surface patch is to
be installed, trim away the damaged area and
round all corners. Cut a piece of plastic of sufficient size to cover the damaged area and extend at least 3/4 inch on each side of the crack
or hole. Bevel the edges as shown in figure 3-22. If the section to be repaired is
curved, shape the patch to the same contour by
heating it in an oil bath at a temperature of
°F,
248 to 302 or it may be heated on a
hot-plate until soft. Boiling water should not
be used for heating. Coat the patch evenly
with plastic solvent adhesive and immediately
place it over the hole. Maintain a uniform
pressure of 5 to 10 psi on the patch for a
minimum of 3 hours. Allow the patch to dry
24 to 36 hours before sanding or polishing.
b. Plug Patch. When using inserted
patches to repair holes in plastic structures,
trim the holes to a perfect circle or oval and
bevel the edges slightly. Make the patch
slightly thicker than the material being
[FIG 3-22] Surface patches.
repaired and similarly bevel its edges. Install
patches in accordance with figure 3-23. Heat
the plug until soft and press it into the hole
without cement and allow to cool to make a
perfect fit. Remove the plug, coat the edges
with adhesive, and then reinsert in the hole.
Maintain a firm light pressure until the cement
has set. Sand or file the edges level with the
surface, then buff and polish.
[FIG 3-23] Plug patch repair.
