AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 3: TRANSPARENT PLASTICS

3-27. INSTALLATION PROCEDURES.
When installing a replacement panel, use the
same mounting method employed by the
manufacturer of the aircraft. While the actual
installation will vary from one type of aircraft
to another, consider the following major principles when installing any replacement panel.
a. Never force a plastic panel out of
shape to make it fit a frame. If a replacement
panel does not fit easily into the mounting,
obtain a new replacement or heat the whole
panel and reform. When possible, cut and fit a
new panel at ordinary room temperature.
b. In clamping or bolting plastic panels
into their mountings, do not place the plastic
under excessive compressive stress. It is easy
to develop more than 1,000 psi on the plastic
by over-torquing a nut and bolt. Tighten each
nut to a firm fit, then back the nut off one full
turn (until they are snug and can still be rotated
with the fingers).
c. In bolted installations, use spacers,
collars, shoulders, or stop-nuts to prevent
tightening the bolt excessively. Whenever
such devices are used by the aircraft manufacturer, retain them in the replacement installation. It is important that the original number
of bolts, complete with washers, spacers, etc.,
be used. When rivets are used, provide adequate spacers or other satisfactory means to
prevent excessive tightening of the frame to
the plastic.
d. Mount plastic panels between rubber,
cork, or other gasket material to make the installation waterproof, to reduce vibration, and
to help to distribute compressive stresses on
the plastic.
e. Plastics expand and contract considerably more than the metal channels in which
they are mounted. Mount windshield panels to
a sufficient depth in the channel to prevent it
from falling out when the panel contracts at
low temperatures or deforms under load.
When the manufacturer’s original design permits, mount panels to a minimum depth of
1-1/8 inch, and with a clearance of 1/8 inch
between the plastic and bottom of the channel.
f. In installations involving bolts or rivets, make the holes through the plastic oversize by 1/8-inch diameter and center so that the
plastic will not bind or crack at the edge of the
holes. The use of slotted holes is also recommended.
3-28.3-39.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 4. WINDSHIELDS, ENCLOSURES,
