AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 3: FIBERGLASS AND PLASTICS  Section 2: METALLIC SANDWICH SECONDARY STRUCTURE REPAIRS

3-10. REPAIRS TO METALLIC SANDWICH SECONDARY STRUCTURE. Magnesium, titanium, or stainless steel facings require special procedures that are not included
in the following methods of repair. Aluminum
alloys such as 7075-T6, 2024-T3, and 2014-T6
are commonly used for the repair of facings for
sandwich structural parts having aluminum
facings. For maximum corrosion resistance,
use only clad aluminum for repairs to clad
aluminum alloy facings.
a. Dents, scratches, or fractures, not exceeding 1/4 inch in largest dimension in aluminum facings, may be repaired with a suitable filler such as viscous epoxy resin. Dents
that are delaminated shall not be filled but repaired. Thoroughly clean the repair area with
fine sandpaper and acetone before applying the
filler. After the resin has partially cured, remove any excess resin with a sharp plastic
scraper. When the resin has completely cured,
sand to the original contour. If the damage included a fracture, reclean the area around the
filled hole and apply a surface patch.
b. Fractures or punctures in one facing
and partial damage to the core of an aluminum-faced laminate may be repaired by several
different methods. The technique used will
depend upon the size of the damage, the
strength required, and the aerodynamic loads
of the area involved. If the repair requires
aerodynamic smoothness, the facing surrounding the repair core cavity may have to be
step cut to one-half its thickness. This can be
done by using a router with an end mill bit and
a template.
c. Damage that extends completely
through the core and both facings may be repaired using the same general techniques as
those used for repairing fiberglass laminates
when both facings are accessible.
SECONDARY STRUCTURE REPAIRS
d. After locating the extent of the total
damaged area by tapping or other nondestructive test methods, remove the damaged facing
and that portion of the core material that is also
affected. The depth to which the core must be
removed will depend upon the type of core
material and the method of repair. The replacement core material must be the same
material and core cell size as the original. Fabricate core material to shape, keeping the same
core ribbon or grain direction. When a substitution is permissible, wood or glass-fabric
honey-comb cores are sometimes used in the
repair of aluminum honeycomb cores, as they
are generally easier to shape. Typical types of
core replacements are shown in figure 3-10.
Resin fills can be used to replace the core and
facing where smaller core damage exists.
Phenolic microballoons, low-density insulating
materials, and/or other ingredients are added to
lower the density and give greater flexibility.
e. For the repair of larger holes in which
it is inconvenient to use a face patch because
of aerodynamic smoothness requirements in
that area, both the core and facing are sometimes replaced with glass-fiber fabric discs and
resin. Undercut the core, as shown in figure 3-11, in order to obtain a better bonding of
the fill with the facing. Fill the core cavity
with accurately shaped resin-saturated glass
cloth discs, and press each ply down to remove
any air bubbles. Special care should be taken
that the final plies fit well against the underside of the top facing. When the core cavity is
filled, close the cutout in the facing with resinimpregnated glass fiber fabric discs that have
been precut to size.
f. Overlap repairs, typically called scab
patches, have a long history of use in repairing
aircraft structures. These repairs simply cover
the damaged area with patch material. Overlap
repairs can be bonded and/or mechanically
[FIG 3-10] Typical types of core replacement.
[FIG 3-11] Typical undercut core material cavity.
fastened. Figure 3-12 shows a cross-section of
a typical bonded and mechanically fastened repair. The damaged area may or may not need
to be filled.
(1) Bonded overlap repairs work well
on most structures. The overlap repair consists
of a solid patch material such as metal, precured laminates, prepreg or wet layup material
co-cured in place.
(2) Bolt or blind rivet. Mechanically
fastened, bolted, or blind rivet repairs are primarily used for thick structures. Primary concerns include bolt/rivet spacing, fastener diameter, number of fasteners, and sealant type.
g. Core potting is the process of filling
the core cutout with a curable paste filler material. If the damage is sustained in an area with
an already-potted core, the replacement core
should also be potted. In other cases, if the
honeycomb or foam core is damaged, it may
be potted rather than plugged if the damaged
area is small (1 inch or less). Remove the face
sheet with a power router, using a router template to prevent injury to undamaged face skin.
The router may be adjusted to remove one of
the face skins only, a face skin and part of the
core, a face skin and all of the core, or both the
face skins and the core. (See figure 3-13.)
(1) It may be necessary when routing a
tapered section such as an aileron to use a
wedge-shaped block between the routing template and the upper surface. This will allow
the router to cut the core material parallel with
the lower surface. (See figure 3-14.)
(2) Select the appropriate potting adhesive as recommended by the manufacturer.
Mix a sufficient quantity of filler to fill the
hole and add microballoons if they are needed
to serve as a filler. When the resin and filler
are thoroughly mixed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, pour the mixture
into the hole filling all of the cells, then work
out all of the bubbles with a toothpick. If performing an overlay repair fill the core cavity to
slightly above the part’s surface. If performing
a flush repair, fill the core cavity to slightly
above the original core.
(3) Cure the compound according to the
manufacturer’s directions. Trim the top of the
cured potting compound flush with the surface,
for the type of repair you are performing.
h. A core plug repair replaces damaged
core material with a shaped piece of similar
core material.
(1) Complete removal of core material
to the opposite face generally requires some
hand-cutting with a core knife. Figure 3-15
shows core material being removed with a core
knife. The core can be peeled away from the
skin bond using duckbill pliers. Sanding is
then required to remove irregular accumulations of adhesive from the undamaged inner
face. Remove only enough adhesive to produce a smooth finish.
CAUTION: Care should be used
when peeling core material from thinskin sandwich face sheets, because the
skin can be damaged by pulling on the
core.
[FIG 3-12] Cross section of bonded and bolted overlap repairs.
[FIG 3-13] Honeycomb core removal.

FIGURE 3.14 Removing honeycomb core from a
tapered control surface.
[FIG 3-15] Removal of core with core knife.
(2) A core plug should be fabricated as
follows. Select the core density. Cell size and
ribbon direction and thickness should be at
least the same as that used in the original construction. Trim the sides of the plug to a loose
fit in the routed cavity. Trim the plug height so
the top of the plug sits .001 inch higher than
the level of the original surface. The core will
compress and set during cure thereby requiring
the extra height. Carefully remove the
trimmed core plug from the machined cavity.
Use a vacuum cleaning device to remove any
dust or particles remaining on the core plug or
in the repair area. Clean the core plug by
rinsing with an approved solvent and wrap the
plug in a clean polyethylene bag until needed
for assembly.
CAUTION: When handling film adhesives, prepreg fabrics, or parts with
prepared surfaces, latex gloves must
be worn.
(3) Using a film adhesive, the core plug
should be installed as follows. Select the appropriate adhesive film. Cut one disk of adhesive to the same shape and size as the perimeter of the repair cutout if the repair extends
through the entire core thickness. Cut two
disks if a partial depth core repair is being
made. Cut one strip of core splice adhesive to
wrap around the core perimeter to its full
depth. For a partial depth core repair, also cut
out a fiberglass or aluminum disk, again
matching the size and the shape of the repair
cutout. Figure 3-16 shows the details of a partial depth core repair. Preassemble the pieces.
(4) Wipe the bottom and sides of the
cutout area with solvent. Allow the area to
dry. Insert the core plug assembly with splice
adhesive applied to the perimeter into the core
cutout. Ensure the core plug ribbon direction
matches that of the parent core. In the case of
a partial depth core repair, the plug and disk
[FIG 3-16] Details of core repair.
may be cured to save time. Some restraining
method, such as vacuum bagging, may be desirable over the core splice adhesive as this
material usually foams up and out during cure.
Cure the adhesive according to the manufacturer’s directions and allow the area to cool.
(5) Trim the top of the cured core plug
flush with either the original core or the mold
line, depending on the type of laminate repair
to be performed. Proceed with laminate repair.
