AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 5: WELDING AND BRAZING

4-88. BRAZING. Brazing refers to a group
of metal-joining processes in which the bonding material is a nonferrous metal or alloy with
a melting point higher than 425 C (800 F), but
lower than that of the metals being joined.
Brazing includes silver brazing (erroneously
called silver soldering or hard soldering), copper brazing, and aluminum brazing.
NOTE: Never weld over a previously
brazed joint.
a. Brazing requires less heat than welding
and can be used to join metals that are damaged by high heat. However, because the
strength of brazed joints is not as great as
welded joints, brazing is not used for structural
repairs on aircraft. In deciding whether brazing of a joint is justified, it should be remembered that a metal, which will be subjected to a
sustained high temperature in use, should not
be brazed.
b. A brazing flux is necessary to obtain a
good union between the clean base metal and
the filler metal. There are a number of readily
available manufactured fluxes conforming to
AWS and AMT specifications.
c. The base metal should be preheated
slowly with a mild flame. When it reaches a
dull-red heat (in the case of steel), the rod
should be heated to a dark (or purple) color
and dipped into the flux. Since enough flux
adheres to the rod, it is not necessary to spread
it over the surface of the metal.
d. A neutral flame is used in most brazing
applications. However, a slightly oxidizing
flame should be used when copper-zinc, copper-zinc-silicon, or copper-zinc-nickel-silicon
filler alloys are used. When brazing aluminum
and its alloys, a neutral flame is preferred, but
if difficulties are encountered, a slightly reduced flame is preferred to an oxidizing flame.
e. The filler rod can now be brought near
the tip of the torch, causing the molten bronze
to flow over a small area of the seam. The
base metal must be at the flowing temperature
of the filler metal before it will flow into the
joint. The brazing metal melts when applied to
the steel and runs into the joint by capillary attraction. In braze welding, the rod should
continue to be added, as the brazing progresses, with a rhythmic dipping action; so that
the bead will be built to a uniform width and
height. The job should be completed rapidly
and with as few passes of the rod and torch as
possible.
f. When the job is finished, the metal
should be allowed to cool slowly. After cooling, remove the flux from the parts by immersing them for 30 minutes in a lye solution.
(1) Copper brazing of steel is normally done
in a special furnace having a controlled atmosphere, and at a temperature so high that field
repairs are seldom feasible. If copper brazing
is attempted without a controlled atmosphere,
the copper will probably not completely wet
and fill the joint. Therefore, copper brazing in
any conditions other than appropriately controlled conditions is not recommended.
(a) The allowable shear strength for copper
brazing of steel alloys should be 15 thousand
pounds per square inch (kpsi), for all conditions of heat treatment.
(b) The effect of the brazing process on the
strength of the parent or base metal of steel
alloys should be considered in the structural
design. Where copper furnace brazing is employed, the calculated allowable strength of
the base metal, which is subjected to the temperatures of the brazing process, should be in
accordance with table 4-14.
[TABLE 4-14] Calculated allowable strength of base
metal.
Material Allowable Strength
Heat-treated material (in­ Mechanical properties of
cluding normalized) used normalized material
in “as-brazed”
condition
Heat-treated material (in­ Mechanical properties
cluding normalized) corresponding to heat
reheat-treated during or treatment performed
after brazing
(2) Alloys commonly referred to as silver
°C °F),
solders melt above 425 (800 and when
using them the process should be called silver
brazing.
(a) The principal use of silver brazing in aircraft work is in the fabrication of high-pressure
oxygen lines and other parts which must withstand vibration and high temperatures. Silver
brazing is used extensively to join copper (and
its alloys), nickel, silver, various combinations
of these metals, and thin steel parts. Silver
brazing produces joints of higher strength than
those produced by other brazing processes.
(b) It is necessary to use flux in all silverbrazing operations, because of the necessity for
having the base metal chemically clean, (without the slightest film of oxide to prevent the
silver-brazing alloy from coming into intimate
contact with the base metal).
(c) The joint must be physically and chemically clean, which means it must be free of all
dirt, grease, oil, and paint. After removing the
dirt, grease, and paint, any oxide should be
removed by grinding or filing the piece until
bright metal can be seen. During the soldering
operation, the flux continues the
process of keeping oxide away from the metal
and aids the flow of solder.
(d) In figure 4-32, three types of joints for
silver brazing are shown; flanged butt, lap, and
edge joints. If a lap joint is used, the amount
of lap should be determined according to the
strength needed in the joint. For strength equal
to that of the base metal in the heated zone, the
amount of lap should be four to six times the
metal thickness.
[FIG 4-32] Silver brazing joints.
(e) The oxyacetylene flame for silver brazing
should be neutral, but may have a slight excess
of acetylene. It must be soft, not harsh. During both preheating and application of the solder, the tip of the inner cone of the flame
should be held about 1/2 inch from the work.
The flame should be kept moving so that the
metal will not become overheated.
(f) When both parts of the base metal are at
the right temperature (indicated by the flow of
flux), brazing alloy can be applied to the surface of the under or inner part at the edge of
the seam. It is necessary to simultaneously direct the flame over the seam, and keep moving
it so that the base metal remains at an even
temperature.
(3) The torch can be shut off simply by
closing the acetylene off first and allowing the
gas remaining in the torch tip to burn out.
Then turn off the oxygen valve. If the torch is
not to be used again for a long period, the
pressure should be turned off at the cylinder.
The hose lines should then be relieved of pressure by opening the torch needle valves and
the working pressure regulator, one at a time,
allowing the gas to escape. Again, it is a good
practice to relieve the oxygen pressure and
then the acetylene pressure. The hose should
then be coiled or hung carefully to prevent
damage or kinking.
(4) Soft soldering is used chiefly for copper,
brass, and coated iron in combination with
mechanical seams; that is, seams that are riveted, bolted, or folded. It is also used where a
leak-proof joint is desired, and sometimes for
fitting joints to promote rigidity and prevent
corrosion. Soft soldering is generally performed only in very minor repair jobs. This
process is used to join electrical connections
because it forms a strong union with low electrical resistance.
(a) Soft solder gradually yields under a
steadily applied load and should not be used
unless the transmitted loads are very low. It
should never be used as a means of joining
structural members.
(b) A soldering iron is the tool used in soldering. Its purpose is to act as a source of heat
for the soldering operation. The bit, or working face, is made from copper since this metal
will readily absorb heat and transmit it to the
work. Figure 4-33 shows a wedge-shaped bit.
[FIG 4-33] Electric soldering iron.
(c) To tin the soldering iron, it is first heated
to a bright red, and then the point is cleaned
(by filing) until it is smooth and bright. No
dirt or pits should remain on its surface. After
the soldering iron has been mechanically
cleaned, it should be reheated sufficiently to
melt solder and chemically cleaned by rubbing
it firmly on a block of sal ammoniac (ammonium chloride). Rosin flux paste may also be
used. Solder is then applied to the point and
wiped with a clean cloth.
(d) A properly tinned copper iron has a thin
unbroken film of solder over the entire surface
of its point.
(e) Soft solders are chiefly alloys of tin and
lead. The percentages of tin and lead vary
considerably in various solder, with a corresponding change in their melting points, rang°C °F).
ing from 145-311 (293-592
Half-and-half (50/50) solder is a general purpose solder and is most frequently used. It
contains equal proportions of tin and lead, and
°C °F).
it melts at approximately 182 (360
(f) The application of the melted solder requires somewhat more care than is apparent.
The parts to be soldered should be locked together or held mechanically or manually while
tacking. To tack the seam, the hot copper iron
is touched to a bar of solder, then the drops of
solder adhering to the copper iron are used to
tack the seam at a number of points. The film
of solder between the surfaces of a joint must
be kept thin to make the strongest joint.
(g) A hot, well-tinned soldering copper iron
should be held so that its point lies flat on the
metal (at the seam), while the back of the copper iron extends over the seam proper at a
45-degree angle, and a bar of solder is touched
to the point. As the solder
melts, the copper iron is drawn slowly along
the seam. As much solder as necessary is
added without raising the soldering copper iron
from the job. The melted solder should run
between the surfaces of the two sheets and
cover the full width of the seam. Work should
progress along the seam only as fast as the solder will flow into the joint.
