AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 4: METAL REPAIR PROCEDURES

4-50. GENERAL. The airframe of a fixedwing aircraft is generally considered to consist
of five principal units; the fuselage, wings,
stabilizers, flight control surfaces, and landing
gear.
a. Aircraft principal structural elements
(PSE) and joints are designed to carry loads by
distributing them as stresses. The elements
and joints as originally fabricated are strong
enough to resist these stresses, and must remain so after any repairs. Long, thin elements
are called members. Some examples of members are the metal tubes that form engine
mount and fuselage trusses and frames, beams
used as wing spars, and longerons and stringers of metal-skinned fuselages and wings.
Longerons and stringers are designed to carry
principally axial loads, but are sometimes required to carry side loads and bending moments, as when they frame cutouts in
metal-skinned structures. Truss members are
designed to carry axial (tension and compression) loads applied to their ends only. Frame
members are designed to carry side loads and
bending moments in addition to axial loads.
Beam members are designed to carry side
loads and bending moments that are usually
large compared to their axial loads. Beams
that must resist large axial loads, particularly
compression loads, in combination with side
loads and bending moments are called
beam-columns. Other structural elements such
as metal skins, plates, shells, wing ribs, bulkheads, ring frames, intercostal members, gussets, and other reinforcements, and fittings are
designed to resist complex stresses, sometimes
in three dimensions.
b. Any repair made on an aircraft structure must allow all of the stresses to enter,
sustain these stresses, and then allow them to
return into the structure. The repair must be
equal to the original structure, but not stronger
or stiffer, which will cause stress concentrations or alter the resonant frequency of the
structure.
c. All-metal aircraft are made of very
thin sheet metal, and it is possible to restore
the strength of the skin without restoring its rigidity. All repairs should be made using the
same type and thickness of material that was
used in the original structure. If the original
skin had corrugations or flanges for rigidity,
these must be preserved and strengthened. If a
flange or corrugation is dented or cracked, the
material loses much of its rigidity; and it must
be repaired in such a way that will restore its
rigidity, stiffness, and strength.
