AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 3: PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES

4-36. FLUTTER AND VIBRATION
PRECAUTIONS. To prevent the occurrence
of severe vibration or flutter of flight control
surfaces during flight, precautions must be
taken to stay within the design balance limitations when performing maintenance or repair.
a. Balance Changes. The importance of
retaining the proper balance and rigidity of aircraft control surfaces cannot be overemphasized. The effect of repair or weight change on
the balance and center of gravity is proportionately greater on lighter surfaces than on the
older heavier designs. As a general rule, repair
the control surface in such a manner that the
weight distribution is not affected in any way,
in order to preclude the occurrence of flutter of
the control surface in flight. Under certain
conditions, counter-balance weight is added
forward of the hinge line to maintain balance.
Add or remove balance weights only when
necessary in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Flight testing must be accomplished to ensure flutter is not a problem.
Failure to check and retain control surface balance within the original or maximum allowable value could result in a serious flight
hazard.
b. Painting and Refinishing. Special
emphasis is directed to the effect of too many
extra coats of paint on balanced control surfaces. Mechanics must avoid adding additional coats of paint in excess of what the
manufacturer originally applied. If available
consult the aircraft manufacturer’s instructions
relative to finishing and balance of control
surfaces.
c. Trapped Water or Ice. Instances of
flutter have occurred from unbalanced conditions caused by the collection of water or ice
within the surface. Therefore, ventilation and
drainage provisions must be checked and retained when maintenance is being done.
d. Trim Tab Maintenance. Loose or vibrating trim tabs will increase wear of actuating mechanisms and hinge points which may
develop into serious flutter conditions. When
this happens, primary control surfaces are
highly susceptible to wear, deformation, and
fatigue failures because of the buffeting nature
of the airflow over the tab mechanism. Trailing-edge play of the tab may increase, creating
an unsafe flutter condition. Careful inspection
of the tab and its mechanism should be conducted during overhaul and annual inspection
periods. Compared to other flight control systems on the aircraft, only a minor amount of
tab-mechanism wear can be tolerated.
(1) Free play and stiffness may best be
measured by a simple static test where “upward” and “downward” (or “leftward” and
“rightward”) point forces are applied near the
trailing edge of the tab at the span-wise attachment of the actuator (so as not to twist the
tab). The control surface to which the trim tab
is attached should be locked in place. Rotational deflection readings are then taken near
the tab trailing edge using an appropriate
measuring device, such as a dial gauge. Several deflection readings should be taken using
loads first applied in one direction, then in the
opposite. If the tab span does not exceed
35 percent of the span of the supporting control surface, the total free play at the tab trailing edge should not exceed 2 percent of the tab
chord. If the tab span equals or exceeds
35 percent of the span of the supporting control surface, the total free play at the tab trailing edge should not exceed 1 percent of the
distance from the tab hinge line to the trailing
edge of the tab perpendicular to the tab hinge
line. For example, a tab that has a chord of
4 inches and less than or equal to 35 percent of
the control surface span would have a maximum permissible free play of 4 inches x 0.020
or 0.080 inches (total motion up and down)
measured at the trailing edge. Correct any free
play in excess of this amount.
(2) Care must also be exercised during
repair or rework to prevent stress concentration
points or areas that could increase the fatigue
susceptibility of the trim tab system. Advisory
Circular (AC) 23.629-1A, Means of Compliance with Section 23.629, “Flutter,” contains
additional information on this subject.
NOTE: If the pilot has experienced
flutter, or thinks he/she has, then a
complete inspection of the aircraft
flight control system and all related
components including rod ends,
bearings, hinges, and bellcranks must
be accomplished. Suspected parts
should be replaced.
