AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 4: METAL REPAIR PROCEDURES

4-62. SELECTIVE PLATING IN AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE. Selective plating
is a method of depositing metal from an electrolyte to the selected area. The electrolyte is
held in an absorbent material attached to an inert anode. Plating contact is made by brushing
or swabbing the part (cathode) with the electrolyte-bearing anode.
a. Selective Plating Uses. This process
can be utilized for any of the following reasons.
THE NUMBER OF RIVETS REQUIRED
OF THE CUT IS DETERMINED BY
OF THE FRAME “t,” AND THE RIVET
10 IN A MANNER SIMILAR TO THAT
20.
NOTE b. IN TABLE 4-10 INDICATES
THE NUMBER OF RIVETS SO
SPLICES IN INTERMEDIATE.
“L” SHOULD BE MORE THAN TWICE
Thickness of splice plate to be greater
[FIG 4-20] Example of intermediate frame stringer splice
IN EACH LEG ON EACH SIDE
THE WIDTH “W,” THE THICKNESS
DIAMETER “d” USING TABLE 4FOR STRINGERS IN FIGURE 4THAT ONLY 60 PERCENT OF
CALCULATED NEED BE USED IN
EXAMPLE: (FOR 2017-T3 aluminum alloy frame)
FLANGE LEG
t = .040”
d = 1/8” 2117-T4 (AD)
W & W = .6 inch
1 3
NO. OF RIVETS PER INCH OF WIDTH
FROM TABLE 4-10 = 6.2
No. of rivets required = W x 6.2 =
.6 x 6.2 = 3.72 or 4 rivets.
60 percent of 4 rivets = 2.4 rivets.
USE 3 RIVETS ON EACH SIDE OF THE
CUT IN EACH FLANGE LEG.
WEB OF ZEE (OR CHANNEL)
t = .040”
d = 1/8” 2117-T4 (AD) rivet
W = 2.0 inches
NO. OF RIVETS PER INCH OF WIDTH
FROM TABLE 4-10 = 6.2
No. of rivets required = W x 6.2 =
2.0 x 6.2 = 12.4 or 13 rivets.
60 percent of 13 rivets = 7.8 rivets.
USE 8 RIVETS ON EACH SIDE OF CUT
IN THE WEB OF ZEE (OR CHANNEL).
W
2
than that of the frame to be spliced.
(material 2017-T3 AL alloy).
[FIG 4-21] Typical methods of repairing cracked leading
and trailing edges and rib intersections.
[FIG 4-22] Typical methods of replacing cracked members
at fittings.
[FIG 4-23] Typical methods of repairing cracked frame and
stiffener combination.
[FIG 4-24] Typical repairs to rudder and to fuselage at
tail post.
[FIG 4-25] Typical methods of repairing elongated or worn
bolt holes.
(1) To prevent or minimize disassembly, or reassembly.
(2) Resizing worn components (plate to
size).
(3) Filling in damaged or corroded areas.
(4) To plate small areas of extremely
large parts.
(5) To plate electrical contacts.
(6) To plate parts too large for existing
baths.
(7) To supplement conventional plating.
(8) To plate components which become
contaminated if immersed in a plating bath.
(9) To cadmium-plate ultrahigh strength
steels without hydrogen embrittlement.
(10) On-site plating.
(11) Reverse current applications (e.g.,
stain removal, deburring, etching, and dynamic
balancing).
b. Specifications. Selective plating
(electrodepositions), when properly applied,
will meet the following specifications and
standards.
(1) QQ-C-320, Chromium Plating.
(2) QQ-N-290, Nickel Plating.
(3) QQ-P-416, Cadmium Plating.
(4) QQ-S-365, Silver Plating.
(5) QQ-Z-325, Zinc Plating.
(6) MIL-T-10727, Tin Plating.
(7) MIL-C-14550, Copper Plating.
(8) MIL-G-45204, Gold Plating.
c. General Requirements.
(1) Areas to be repaired by this process
should be limited to small areas of large parts,
particularly electrical or electronic parts.
(2) All solutions should be kept clean
and free from contamination. Care should be
taken to insure that the solutions are not contaminated by used anodes or other plating solutions. Brush-plating solutions are not designed to remove large amounts of scale, oil,
or grease. Mechanical or chemical methods
should be used to remove large amounts of
scale or oxide. Use solvents to remove grease
or oil.
(3) Brush-plating solutions are five to
fifty times as concentrated as tank solutions.
The current densities used range from 500 to
4,000 amps/feet2. The voltages listed on the
solution bottles have been precalculated to
give proper current densities. Too high a current density burns the plating, while too low a
current density produces stressed deposits and
low efficiencies. Agitation is provided by anode/cathode motion. Too fast a motion results
in low efficiencies and stressed deposits, and
too slow a motion causes burning. A dry tool
results in burnt plate, coarse grain structure,
and unsound deposits. The tool cannot be too
°F
wet. Solution temperatures of 110 to
°F
120 are reached during operation.
(4) Materials such as stainless steel,
aluminum, chromium, and nickel (which have
a passive surface) will require an activating
operation to remove the passive surface. During the activating process, do not use solutions
that have been previously used with reverse
current (because of solution contamination).
d. Equipment. The power source should
operate on either 110 or 220-volt alternating
current (AC), 60 Hertz, single-phase input. It
should have a capability to produce direct current (DC) having smooth characteristics with
controlled ripple and be able to output a current of at least 25 amperes at 0 to 25 volts.
Minimum instrumentation of the power source
should include a voltmeter, ammeter, and ampere-hour meter.
(1) The ammeter should provide a fullscale reading equal to the maximum capacity
of the power source, and with an accuracy of
±5 percent of the current being measured.
(2) The voltmeter should have sufficient
capacity to provide a full-scale reading equal
to the maximum capacity of the power source
and an accuracy of ±1.0 volt.
(3) An ampere-hour meter should be
readable to 0.001 ampere-hour and have an accuracy of ±0.01 ampere-hour.
(4) The stylus should be designed for
rapid cooling and to hold anodes of various
sizes and configurations. For safety, the anode
holder should be insulated.
(5) The containers for holding and
catching runoff solutions should be designed to
the proper configuration and be inert to the
specific solution.
(6) The mechanical cleaning equipment
and materials should be designed and selected
to prevent contamination of the parts to be
cleaned.
e. Materials. The anodes should be of
high-purity dense graphite or platinum-iridium
alloys. Do not mix solutions from different
suppliers. This could result in contamination.
f. Detail Requirements. On large parts,
no area greater than approximately 10 percent
of the total area of the part should be plated by
this selective plating process. Small parts may
be partially or completely plated. Special
cases exceeding these limitations should be
coordinated with the manufacturer of the plating equipment being used and their recommendations should be followed.
g. Anode Selection. As a general guide,
the contact area of the anode should be approximately one-third the size of the area to be
plated. When selecting the anode, the configuration of the part will dictate the shape of the
anode.
h. Required Ampere-Hour Calculation.
The selected plating solution has a factor
which is equal to the ampere-hours required to
deposit 0.0001 inch on 1 square inch of surface. Determine the thickness of plating desired on a certain area, and multiply the solution factor times the plating thickness times the
area in square inches to determine the ampere-hours required. This factor may vary because of temperature, current density, etc.
i. Cleaning. Remove corrosion, scale,
oxide, and unacceptable plating prior to processing. Use a suitable solvent or cleaner to
remove grease or oil.
j. Plating on Aluminum and Aluminum
Base Alloys.
(1) Electroclean the area using direct
current until water does not break on the surface. This electroclean process should be accomplished at 10 to 15 volts, using the appropriate electroclean solution.
(2) Rinse the area in cold, clean tap
water.
(3) Activate the area with reverse current, 7 to 10 volts, in conjunction with the
proper activating solution until a uniform,
gray-to-black surface is obtained.
(4) Rinse thoroughly in cold, clean tap
water.
(5) Immediately electroplate to color
while the area is still wet, using the appropriate
nickel solution.
(6) Rinse thoroughly.
(7) Immediately continue plating with
any other solution to desired thickness.
(8) Rinse and dry.
k. Plating on Copper and Copper Base
Alloys.
(1) Electroclean the area using direct
current until water does not break on the surface. The electroclean process should be accomplished at 8 to 12 volts using the appropriate electroclean solution.
(2) Rinse the area in cold, clean tap
water.
(3) Immediately electroplate the area
with any of the plating solutions, except silver.
Silver requires an undercoat.
(4) Rinse and dry.
l. Plating on 300 and 400 Series Stainless Steels, Nickel Base Alloys, Chrome Base
Alloys, High Nickel Ferrous Alloys, Cobalt
Base Alloys, Nickel Plate, and Chrome
Plate.
(1) Electroclean the area using direct
current until water does not break on the surface. This electroclean process should be accomplished at 12 to 20 volts using the appropriate electrocleaning solution.
(2) Rinse the area in cold, clean tap
water.
(3) Activate the surface using direct
current for 1 to 2 minutes, using the activating
solution, and accomplish at 6 to 20 volts.
(4) Do not rinse.
(5) Immediately nickel-flash the surface
to a thickness of 0.00005 to 0.0001 inch, using
the appropriate nickel solution.
(6) Rinse thoroughly.
(7) Immediately continue plating with
any other solution to desired thickness.
(8) Rinse and dry.
m. Plating on Low-Carbon Steels (Heat
Treated to 180,000 psi).
(1) Electroclean the area using direct
current until water does not break on the surface. This electroclean process should be accomplished at 12 to 20 volts, using the appropriate electrocleaning solution.
(2) Rinse the area in cold, clean tap
water.
(3) Reverse-current etch at 8 to
10 volts, using the appropriate activating solution, until a uniform gray surface is obtained.
(4) Rinse thoroughly.
(5) Immediately electroplate the part
using any solutions, except copper or silver.
Both of these require undercoats.
(6) Rinse and dry.
n. Plating on Cast Iron and
High-Carbon Steels (Steels Heat Treated to
180,000 psi).
(1) Electroclean the area using direct
current until water does not break on the surface. This electroclean process should be accomplished at 12 to 20 volts, using the appropriate electrocleaning solution.
(2) Rinse the area thoroughly in cold,
clean tap water.
(3) Reverse-current etch at 8 to
10 volts, using the appropriate etching solution, until a uniform gray is obtained.
(4) Rinse thoroughly.
(5) Remove surface smut with 15 to
25 volts using the appropriate activating solution.
(6) Rinse thoroughly.
(7) Electroplate immediately, using any
of the solutions, except copper or silver (both
of these require undercoats).
(8) Rinse and dry.
o. Plating on Ultrahigh Strength Steels
(Heat Treated Above 180,000 psi).
(1) Electroclean the area using reverse
current until water does not break on the surface. This electroclean process should be accomplished at 8 to 12 volts using the appropriate electroclean solution.
(2) Rinse the area thoroughly in cold,
clean tap water.
(3) Immediately electroplate the part,
using either nickel, chromium, gold, or cadmium. Other metals require an undercoat of
one of the above. Plate initially at the highest
voltage recommended for the solution so as to
develop an initial barrier layer. Then reduce to
standard voltage.
(4) Rinse and dry.
°F
(5) Bake the part for 4 hours at 375
± °F.
25
NOTE: Where the solution vendor
provides substantiating data that hydrogen embrittlement will not result
from plating with a particular solution, then a postbake is not required.
This substantiating data can be in the
form of aircraft industry manufacturer’s process specifications, military
specifications, or other suitable data.
NOTE: Acid etching should be
avoided, if possible. Where etching is
absolutely necessary, it should always
be done with reverse current. Use alkaline solutions for initial deposits.
p. Dissimilar Metals and Changing
Base. As a general rule, when plating two dissimilar metals, follow the plating procedure for
the one with the most steps or activation. If
activating steps have to be mixed, use reversecurrent activation steps prior to direct-current
activation steps.
q. Plating Solution Selection.
(1) Alkaline and neutral solutions are to
be used on porous base metals, white metals,
high-strength steel, and for improved coating
ability. Acid solutions are to be used for rapid
buildup and as a laminating structure material
in conjunction with alkaline-type solutions.
(2) Chrome brush-plating solutions do
not yield as hard a deposit as bath-plating solutions. The hardness is about 600 Brinell as
compared to 1,000 Brinell for hard chrome deposited from a tank.
(3) Silver-immersion deposits will form
with no current flowing on most base metals
from the silver brush-plating solutions. Such
deposits have poor adhesion to the base metal.
Consequently, a flash of a more noble metal
should be deposited prior to silver plating to
develop a good bond.
(4) In general, brush plating gives less
hydrogen embrittlement and a lower fatigue
strength loss than does equivalent tank deposits. However, all brush-plated, ultrahigh
strength steel parts (heat treated above
180,000 psi) should be baked, as mentioned,
unless it is specifically known that embrittlement is not a factor.
r. Qualification Tests. All brush-plated
surfaces should be tested for adhesion of the
electrodeposit. Apply a 1-inch wide strip of
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing tape
code 250, or an approved equal, with the adhesive side to the freshly plated surface. Apply
the tape with heavy hand pressure and remove
it with one quick motion perpendicular to the
plated surface. Any plating adhering to the
tape should be cause for rejection.
s. Personnel Training for Quality Control. Manufacturers of selective-plating
equipment provide training in application
techniques at their facilities. Personnel performing selective plating must have adequate
knowledge of the methods, techniques, and
practices involved. These personnel should be
certified as qualified operators by the manufacturers of the products used.
4-63.4-73.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 5. WELDING AND BRAZING
