AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 5: WELDING AND BRAZING

4-98. REPAIRS AT BUILT-IN FUSELAGE FITTINGS. Make splices in accordance with the methods described in paragraphs 4-86 through 4-92. Repair built-in fuselage fittings in the manner shown in figure 4-41. The following paragraphs outline the
different methods as shown in figure 4-41.
a. Tube of Larger Diameter Than Original. A tube (sleeve) of larger diameter than
the original is used in the method shown in
figure 4-41 (A). The forward splice is a
30-degree scarf splice. Cut the rear longeron
(right) approximately 4 inches from the centerline of the joint and fit a 1 inch long spacer
over the longeron, and edge weld this spacer
and longeron. Make a tapered “V” cut approximately 2 inches long in the aft end of the
outer sleeve, and swage the end of the outer
sleeve to fit the longeron and weld.
b. Tube of Same Diameter as Original. In
the method shown in figure 4-41 (B) the new
section is the same size as the longeron
forward (left) of the fitting. The rear end
(right) of the tube is cut at 30 degrees and
forms the outside sleeve of the scarf splice. A
sleeve is centered over the forward joint as indicated.
c. Simple Sleeve. In figure 4-41 (C), it is assumed the longeron is the same size on each
side of the fitting. It is repaired by a sleeve of
larger diameter than the longeron.
d. Large Difference in Longeron Diameter
Each Side of Fitting. Figure 4-41 (D) assumes that there is 1/4-inch difference in the
diameter of the longeron on the two sides of
the fitting. The section of longeron forward
(left) of the fitting is cut at 30 degrees, and a
section of tubing of the same size as the tube
and of such length as to extend well to the rear
(right) of the fitting is slipped through it. One
end is cut at 30 degrees to fit the 30-degree
scarf at left, and the other end fishmouthed.
This makes it possible to insert a tube of
proper diameter to form an inside sleeve for
the tube on the left of the fitting and an outside
sleeve for the tube on the right of the fitting.
