AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 2: TESTING OF METALS

4-20. MICROHARDNESS TESTING.
This is an indentation hardness test made with
loads not exceeding 1 kg (1,000 g). Such
hardness tests have been made with a load as
light as 1 g, although the majority of microhardness tests are made with loads of 100 to
500 g. In general, the term is related to the
size of the indentation rather than to the load
applied.
a. Fields of Application. Microhardness
testing is capable of providing information regarding the hardness characteristics of materials which cannot be obtained by hardness tests
such as the Brinell or Rockwell, and are as
follows.
(1) Measuring the hardness of precision
work pieces that are too small to be measured
by the more common hardness-testing methods.
(2) Measuring the hardness of product
forms such as foil or wire that are too thin or
too small in diameter to be measured by the
more conventional methods.
(3) Monitoring of carburizing or nitriding operations, which is sometimes accomplished by hardness surveys taken on cross
sections of test pieces that accompanied the
work pieces through production operations.
(4) Measuring the hardness of individual microconstituents.
(5) Measuring the hardness close to
edges, thus detecting undesirable surface conditions such as grinding burn and decarburization.
(6) Measuring the hardness of surface
layers such as plating or bonded layers.
b. Indenters. Microhardness testing can
be performed with either the Knoop or the
Vickers indenter. The Knoop indenter is used
mostly in the United States; the Vickers indenter is the more widely used in Europe.
(1) Knoop indentation testing is performed with a diamond, ground to pyramidal
form, that produces a diamond-shaped indentation with an approximate ratio between long
and short diagonals of 7 to 1. The indentation
depth is about one-thirtieth of its length. Due
to the shape of the indenter, indentations of accurately measurable length are obtained with
light loads.
(2) The Knoop hardness number (HK)
is the ratio of the load applied to the indenter
to the unrecovered projected area of indentation. The formula for this follows.
HK= P/ A= P/ Cl2
Where P is the applied load, in kg; A is the
unrecovered projected area of indentation, in
square mm; l is the measured length of the
long diagonal, in mm; and C is 0.07028, a constant of the indenter relating projected area of
the indentation to the square of the length of
the long diagonal.
