AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 2: TESTING OF METALS

4-18. BRINELL HARDNESS TEST. In
this test a standard constant load, usually
500 to 3,000 kg, is applied to a smooth flat
metal surface by a hardened steel-ball type indenter, 10 mm in diameter. The 500-kg load is
usually used for testing nonferrous metals such
as copper and aluminum alloys, whereas the
3,000-kg load is most often used for testing
harder metals such as steels and cast irons.
The numerical value of Brinell Hardness (HB),
is equal to the load, divided by the surface area
of the resulting spherical impression.
P
HB =
D
(π − −
[D (D2 d 2 )])
2
Where P is the load, in kg; D is the diameter of
the ball, in mm; and d is the diameter of the
indentation, in mm.
a. General Precautions. To avoid misapplication of Brinell hardness testing, the
fundamentals and limitations of the test procedure must be clearly understood. To avoid inaccuracies, the following rules should be followed.
(1) Do not make indentations on a
curved surface having a radius of less than
1 inch.
(2) Do make the indentations with the
correct spacing. Indentations should not be
made too close to the edge of the work piece
being tested.
(3) Apply the load steadily to avoid
overloading caused by inertia of the weights.
(4) Apply the load so the direction of
loading and the test surface are perpendicular
to each other within 2 degrees.
(5) The thickness of the work piece
being tested should be such that no bulge or
mark showing the effect of the load appears on
the side of the work piece opposite the indentation.
(6) The indentation diameter should be
clearly outlined.
b. Limitations. The Brinell hardness test
has three principal limitations.
(1) The work piece must be capable of
accommodating the relatively large indentations.
(2) Due to the relatively large indentations, the work piece should not be used after
testing.
(3) The limit of hardness, 15 HB with
the 500-kg load to 627 HB with the 3,000-kg
load, is generally considered the practical
range.
c. Calibration. A Brinell Hardness Tester
should be calibrated to meet ASTM standard
E10 specifications.
