AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 4: METAL REPAIR PROCEDURES

4-52. ALUMINUM ALLOY STRUCTURES. Extensive repairs to damaged
stressed skin on monocoque-types of aluminum alloy structures must be made in accordance with FAA-approved manufacturer’s instructions or other FAA-approved source.
a. Rivet Holes. Rivet holes are slightly
larger than the diameter of the rivet. When
driven, solid rivets expand to fill the hole. The
strength of a riveted joint is based upon the
expanded diameter of the rivet. Therefore, it is
important that the proper drill size be used for
each rivet diameter.
(1) The acceptable drill size for rivets
may be found in Metallic Materials and Elements for Flight Vehicle Structure
(MIL-HDBK-5).
(2) Avoid drilling oversized holes or
otherwise decreasing the effective tensile areas
of wing-spar capstrips, wing, fuselage, finlongitudinal stringers, or highly-stressed tensile members. Make all repairs, or reinforcements, to such members in accordance with
factory recommendations or with the specific
approval of an FAA representative.
b. Disassembly Prior to Repairing. If
the parts to be removed are essential to the rigidity of the complete structure, support the
structure prior to disassembly in such a manner
as to prevent distortion and permanent damage
to the remainder of the structure. When rivets
are removed, undercut rivet heads by drilling.
Use a drill of the same size as the diameter of
the rivet. Drilling must be exactly centered
and to the base of the head only. After drilling, break off the head with a pin punch and
carefully drive out the shank. On thin or unsupported metal skin, support the sheet metal
on the inside with a bucking bar. Removal of
rivet heads with a cold chisel and hammer is
not recommended because skin damage and
distorted rivet holes will probably result. Inspect rivet joints adjacent to damaged structure
for partial failure by removing one or more
rivets to see if holes are elongated or the rivets
have started to shear.
c. Effective Tools. Care must also be
taken whenever screws must be removed to
avoid damage to adjoining structure. When
properly used, impact wrenches can be effective tools for removal of screws; however,
damage to adjoining structure may result from
excessive vertical loads applied through the
screw axis. Excessive loads are usually related
to improperly adjusted impact tools or attempting to remove screws that have seized
from corrosion. Remove seized screws by
drilling and use of a screw extractor. Once the
screw has been removed, check for structural
cracks that may appear in the adjoining skin
doubler, or in the nut or anchor plate.
