AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 6: WELDING AND BRAZING SAFETY

4-114. FIRE PROTECTION. Practice fire
prevention techniques whenever oxy-fuel operations are in progress. Simple precautions
prevent most fires, and minimize damage in
the event a fire does occur. Always practice
the following rules and safety procedures.
a. Inspect oxy-fuel apparatus for oil,
grease, or damaged parts. DO NOT use the
oxy-fuel apparatus if oil or grease is present or
if damage is evident. Have the oxy-fuel apparatus cleaned and/or repaired by a qualified repair technician before it is used.
b. Never use oil or grease on or around
any oxy-fuel apparatus. Even a trace of oil or
grease can ignite and burn violently in the
presence of oxygen.
c. Keep flames, heat, and sparks away
from cylinders and boxes.
d. Flying sparks can travel as much as
35 feet. Move combustibles a safe distance
away from areas where oxy-fuel operations are
performed.
e. Use approved heat-resistant shields to
protect nearby walls, floor, and ceiling.
f. Have a fire extinguisher of the proper
class (ABC) and size in the work area. Inspect
it regularly to ensure that it is in proper working order. Know how it is used.
g. Use oxy-fuel equipment only with the
gases for which it is intended.
h. DO NOT open an acetylene cylinder
valve more than approximately 1-1/2 turns and
preferably no more than 3/4 of a turn. Keep
the cylinder wrench, if one is required, on the
cylinder valve so, if necessary, the cylinder
may be turned off quickly.
i. On all gases except acetylene, open the
cylinder valve completely to seal the cylinder
back-seal packing.
j. Never test for gas leaks with a flame.
Use an approved leak-detector solution.
k. When work is complete, inspect the
area for possible fires or smoldering materials.
l. Special care should be taken when
welding structural tubing that has been coated
on the inside with linseed oil. Smoke and fire
may be generated by the heat of the torch. Ensure that an observer with a fire extinguisher is
close.
