AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 4: METAL STRUCTURE, WELDING, AND BRAZING  Section 5: WELDING AND BRAZING

4-97. SPLICING USING LARGER DIAMETER REPLACEMENT TUBES. The
method of splicing structural tubes, as shown
in figure 4-40, requires the least amount of
cutting and welding. However, this splicing
method cannot be used where the damaged
tube is cut too near the adjacent cluster joints,
or where bracket-mounting provisions make it
necessary to maintain the same replacement
tube diameter as the original. As an aid to installing the replacement tube, squarely cut the
original damaged tube leaving a minimum
short stub equal to 2-1/2-tube diameters on one
end and a minimum long stub equal to
4-1/2-tube diameters on the other end. Select a
length of steel tube of the same material and at
least the same wall thickness, having an inside
diameter approximately equal to the outside
diameter of the damaged tube. Fit this replacement tube material snugly around the
original tube with a maximum diameter difference of 1/16 inch. From this replacement tube
material, cut a section of tubing diagonally (or
fishmouth) of such a length that each end of
the tube is a minimum distance of 1-1/2-tube
diameters from the end of the cut on the original tube. Use a fishmouth cut replacement
tube wherever possible. Deburr the edges of
the replacement tube and original tube stubs.
If a fishmouth cut is used, file out the sharp radius of the cut with a small round file.
[FIG 4-38] Splicing by outer-sleeve method (replacement
by welded outside sleeve).
[FIG 4-39] Tube replacement at a station by welded outer
[FIG 4-40] Splicing using larger diameter replacement
sleeves.
tube.
Spring the long stub of the original tube from
the normal position, slip the replacement tube
over the long stub, and then back over the
short stub. Center the replacement tube between the stubs of the original tube. Tack
weld one end of the replacement tube in several places, then weld completely around the
end. In order to prevent distortion, allow the
weld to cool completely, then weld the remaining end of the replacement tube to the
original tube.
