AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 1: GENERAL

5-5. FLAWS. Although a specific discussion of flaws and processes will not be given
in this AC, the importance of this area should
not be minimized. Inspection personnel
should know where flaws occur or can be expected to exist and what effect they can have in
each of the NDI test methods. Misinterpretation and/or improper evaluation of flaws or
improper performance of NDI can result in
serviceable parts being rejected and defective
parts being accepted.
All NDI personnel should be familiar with the
detection of flaws such as: corrosion, inherent
flaws, primary processing flaws, secondary
processing or finishing flaws, and in-service
flaws. The following paragraphs classify and
discuss the types of flaws or anomalies that
may be detected by NDI.
a. Corrosion. This is the electrochemical
deterioration of a metal resulting from chemical reaction with the surrounding environment.
Corrosion is very common and can be an extremely critical defect. Therefore, NDI personnel may devote a significant amount of
their inspection time to corrosion detection.
b. Inherent Flaws. This group of flaws is
present in metal as the result of its initial solidification from the molten state, before any
of the operations to forge or roll it into useful
sizes and shapes have begun. The following
are brief descriptions of some inherent flaws.
(1) Primary pipe is a shrinkage cavity
that forms at the top of an ingot during metal
solidification, which can extend deep into the
ingot. Failure to cut away all of the ingot
shrinkage cavity can result in unsound metal,
called pipe, that shows up as irregular voids in
finished products.
(2) Blowholes are secondary pipe holes
in metal that can occur when gas bubbles are
trapped as the molten metal in an ingot mold
solidifies. Many of these blowholes are clean
on the interior and are welded shut into sound
metal during the first rolling or forging of the
ingot. However, some do not weld and can
appear as seams or laminations in finished
products.
(3) Segregation is a nonuniform distribution of various chemical constituents that
can occur in a metal when an ingot or casting
solidifies. Segregation can occur anywhere in
the metal and is normally irregular in shape.
However, there is a tendency for some constituents in the metal to concentrate in the liquid that solidifies last.
(4) Porosity is holes in a material’s surface or scattered throughout the material,
caused by gases being liberated and trapped as
the material solidifies.
(5) Inclusions are impurities, such as
slag, oxides, sulfides, etc., that occur in ingots
and castings. Inclusions are commonly caused
by incomplete refining of the metal ore or the
incomplete mixing of deoxidizing materials
added to the molten metal in the furnace.
(6) Shrinkage cracks can occur in castings due to stresses caused by the metal contracting as it cools and solidifies.
c. Primary Processing Flaws. Flaws
which occur while working the metal down by
hot or cold deformation into useful shapes
such as bars, rods, wires, and forged shapes are
primary processing flaws. Casting and welding are also considered primary processes although they involve molten metal, since they
result in a semi-finished product. The following are brief descriptions of some primary
processing flaws:
(1) Seams are surface flaws, generally
long, straight, and parallel to the longitudinal
axis of the material, which can originate from
ingot blowholes and cracks, or be introduced
by drawing or rolling processes.
(2) Laminations are formed in rolled
plate, sheet, or strip when blowholes or internal fissures are not welded tight during the
rolling process and are enlarged and flattened
into areas of horizontal discontinuities.
(3) Cupping is a series of internal metal
ruptures created when the interior metal does
not flow as rapidly as the surface metal during
drawing or extruding processes. Segregation
in the center of a bar usually contributes to the
occurrence.
(4) Cooling cracks can occur in casting
due to stresses resulting from cooling, and are
often associated with changes in cross sections
of the part. Cooling cracks can also occur
when alloy and tool steel bars are rolled and
subsequently cooled. Also, stresses can occur
from uneven cooling which can be severe
enough to crack the bars. Such cracks are generally longitudinal, but not necessarily straight.
They can be quite long, and usually vary in
depth along their length.
(5) Flakes are internal ruptures that can
occur in metal as a result of cooling too rapidly. Flaking generally occurs deep in a heavy
section of metal. Certain alloys are more susceptible to flaking than others.
(6) Forging laps are the result of metal
being folded over and forced into the surface,
but not welded to form a single piece. They
can be caused by faulty dies, oversized dies,
oversized blanks, or improper handling of the
metal in the die. They can occur on any area
of the forging.
(7) Forging bursts are internal or external ruptures that occur when forging operations are started before the material to be
forged reaches the proper temperature
throughout. Hotter sections of the forging
blank tend to flow around the colder sections
causing internal bursts or cracks on the surface. Too rapid or too severe a reduction in a
section can also cause forging bursts or cracks.
(8) A hot tear is a pulling apart of the
metal that can occur in castings when the metal
contracts as it solidifies.
(9) A cold shut is a failure of metal to
fuse. It can occur in castings when part of the
metal being poured into the mold cools and
does not fuse with the rest of the metal into a
solid piece.
(10) Incomplete weld penetration is a
failure of the weld metal to penetrate completely through a joint before solidifying.
(11) Incomplete weld fusion occurs in
welds where the temperature has not been high
enough to melt the parent metal adjacent to the
weld.
(12) Weld undercutting is a decrease in
the thickness of the parent material at the toe
of the weld caused by welding at too high a
temperature.
(13) Cracks in the weld metal can be
caused by the contraction of a thin section of
the metal cooling faster than a heavier section
or by incorrect heat or type of filler rod. They
are one of the more common types of flaws
found in welds.
(14) Weld crater cracks are star shaped
cracks that can occur at the end of a weld run.
(15) Cracks in the weld heat-affected
zone can occur because of stress induced in the
material adjacent to the weld by its expansion
and contraction from thermal changes.
(16) A slag inclusion is a nonmetallic
solid material that becomes trapped in the weld
metal or between the weld metal and the base
metal.
(17) Scale is an oxide formed on metal
by the chemical action of the surface metal
with oxygen from the air.
d. Secondary Processing or Finishing
Flaws. This category includes those flaws associated with the various finishing operations,
after the part has been rough-formed by rolling, forging, casting or welding. Flaws may be
introduced by heat treating, grinding, and
similar processes. The following are brief descriptions of some secondary processing or
finishing flaws.
(1) Machining tears can occur when
working a part with a dull cutting tool or by
cutting to a depth that is too great for the material being worked. The metal does not break
away clean, and the tool leaves a rough, torn
surface which contains numerous short discontinuities that can be classified as cracks.
(2) Heat treating cracks are caused by
stresses setup by unequal heating or cooling of
portions of a part during heat treating operations. Generally, they occur where a part has a
sudden change of section that could cause an
uneven cooling rate, or at fillets and notches
that act as stress concentration points.
(3) Grinding cracks are thermal type
cracks similar to heat treating cracks and can
occur when hardened surfaces are ground. The
overheating created by the grinding can be
caused by the wheel becoming glazed so that it
rubs instead of cutting the surface; by using
too little coolant; by making too heavy a cut;
or by feeding the material too rapidly. Generally, the cracks are at right angles to the direction of grinding and in severe cases a complete
network of cracks can appear. Grinding cracks
are usually shallow and very sharp at their
roots, which makes them potential sources of
fatigue failure.
(4) Etching cracks can occur when
hardened surfaces containing internal residual
stresses are etched in acid.
(5) Plating cracks can occur when hardened surfaces are electroplated. Generally,
they are found in areas where high residual
stresses remain from some previous operation
involving the part.
e. In-Service Flaws. These flaws are
formed after all fabrication has been completed
and the aircraft, engine, or related component
has gone into service. These flaws are attributable to aging effects caused by either time,
flight cycles, service operating conditions, or
combinations of these effects. The following
are brief descriptions of some in-service flaws.
(1) Stress corrosion cracks can develop
on the surface of parts that are under tension
stress in service and are also exposed to a corrosive environment, such as the inside of wing
skins, sump areas, and areas between two
metal parts of faying surfaces.
(2) Overstress cracks can occur when a
part is stressed beyond the level for which it
was designed. Such overstressing can occur as
the result of a hard landing, turbulence, accident, or related damage due to some unusual or
emergency condition not anticipated by the designer, or because of the failure of some related structural member.
(3) Fatigue cracks can occur in parts
that have been subjected to repeated or
changing loads while in service, such as riveted lap joints in aircraft fuselages. The crack
usually starts at a highly-stressed area and
propagates through the section until failure occurs. A fatigue crack will start more readily
where the design or surface condition provides
a point of stress concentration. Common
stress concentration points are: fillets; sharp
radii; or poor surface finish, seams, or grinding
cracks.
(4) Unbonds, or disbonds, are flaws
where adhesive attaches to only one surface in
an adhesive-bonded assembly. They can be the
result of crushed, broken, or corroded cores in
adhesive-bonded structures. Areas of unbonds
have no strength and place additional stress on
the surrounding areas making failure more
likely.
(5) Delamination is the term used to define the separation of composite material layers within a monolithic structure. Ultrasonic is
the primary method used for the detection of
delamination in composite structures.
