AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 1: GENERAL

5-6. SELECTING THE NDI METHOD.
The NDI method and procedure to be used for
any specific part or component will generally
be specified in the aircraft or component
manufacturer’s maintenance or overhaul
manuals, SSID’s, SB’s, or in AD’s.
NOTE: Some AD’s refer to SB’s
which may, in turn, refer to manufacturer’s overhaul or maintenance
manuals.
a. Appropriate Method. The appropriate
NDI method may consist of several separate
inspections. An initial inspection may indicate
the presence of a possible flaw, but other inspections may be required to confirm the
original indication. Making the correct NDI
method selection requires an understanding of
the basic principles, limitations, and advantages and disadvantages of the available NDI
methods and an understanding of their comparative effectiveness and cost.
b. Other Factors. Other factors affecting
the inspection are:
(1) The critical nature of the
component;
(2) The material, size, shape, and
weight of the part;
(3) The type of defect sought;
(4) Maximum acceptable defect limits
in size and distribution;
(5) Possible locations and orientations
of defects;
(6) Part accessibility or portability; and
(7) The number of parts to be inspected.
c. Degree of Inspection. The degree of
inspection sensitivity required is an important
factor in selecting the NDI method. Critical
parts that cannot withstand small defects and
could cause catastrophic failure require the use
of the more sensitive NDI methods. Less critical parts and general hardware generally require less-sensitive NDI methods.
d. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS).
The various materials used in NDI may contain
chemicals, that if improperly used, can be hazardous to the health and safety of operators and
the safety of the environment, aircraft, and engines. Information on safe handling of materials is provided in MSDS. MSDS, conforming
to Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(29 CFR), part 1910, section 1200, or its
equivalent, must be provided by the material
supplier to any user and must be prepared according to FED-STD-313.
e. Advantages and Disadvantages. Table 5-1 provides a list of the advantages and
disadvantages of common NDI methods. Table 5-1, in conjunction with other information
in the AC, may be used as a guide for evaluating the most appropriate NDI method when
the manufacturer or the FAA has not specified
a particular NDI method to be used.
