AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 4: MAGNETIC PARTICLE INSPECTION

5-50. SPECIAL EXAMINATION TECHNIQUES.
a. Magnetic Rubber. Magnetic rubber
formulations using finely divided magnetic
particles in a silicone rubber base are used for
the inspection of screw, bolt, or other bore
holes, which are not easily accessible. The
liquid silicone rubber mixture is poured into
holes in magnetic parts to be inspected.
Curing time for silicone rubbers varies from
about 30 minutes and up depending upon the
particular silicone rubber, the catalyst, and the
amount of catalyst used to produce the curing
reaction.
b. Curing. While curing is taking place,
the insides of the hole must be maintained in
the required magnetized state. This can be accomplished using a permanent magnet, a DC
yoke, an electromagnet, or some other suitable
means. Whatever method of magnetization is
used, the leakage fields at any discontinuities
inside the holes must be maintained long
enough to attract and hold in position the magnetic particles until a partial cure takes place.
A two-step magnetizing procedure has been
developed.
(1) The first magnetization is accomplished for a short time in one direction followed by a second at 90 degrees to the first for
the same length of time. This procedure must
be repeated for whatever period of time is
needed until the cure prevents particle mobility. Magnetization in two directions
90 degrees apart ensures formation of indications at discontinuities in all directions inside
the holes.
(2) After curing, the rubber plugs,
which are exact replicas of the holes, are removed and visibly examined for indications
which will appear as colored lines against the
lighter colored background of the silicone rubber. Location of any discontinuities or other
surface imperfections in the holes can be determined from the location of the indications
on the plugs. The magnetic rubber inspection
method is covered in detail in Air Force Technical Order 33B-1-1, section XI.
c. Critical Examination for Sharp Radii
Parts. A critical examination is required for
cracks in sharp radii; such as threaded parts,
splines, gear teeth roots, and abrupt changes in
sections, that cause obscuring and nonrelevant
indications during normal examination practices. The procedure provided herein is the
most sensitive method for detecting the early
beginnings of in-service fatigue cracks in the
sharp, internal radii of ferro-magnetic parts.
Magnetic particle examination equipment may
be used; however, alternating fields are not reliable to provide the necessary high level of residual magnetism. Optical aids are necessary
to realize the maximum sensitivity provided by
this magnetic particle procedure. Low-power
(10x-30x) binocular microscopes are recommended. As a minimum, pocket magnifiers of
7 to 10 power may be used with the following
procedure.
(1) Thoroughly clean the part at the
sharp radii and fillets where soils, greases, and
other contaminants tend to accumulate and at
other places where they might be overlooked
during a casual or hasty examination.
(2) The residual method should be used
as an aid in particular problem areas, even
though it is not considered the best practice in
most of the instances. The conventional wet
continuous methods should be used initially
for overall examination and the residual technique should be applied only for supplemental,
local examination of the sharp radii. It should
not be applied except in those cases where
nonrelevant indications have proven to be a
problem in the initial examination.
(3) Methods of magnetization should be
done according to standard procedures; however, alternating fields should not be used, and
the level of magnetizing force imposed should
usually be increased above the normal levels to
ensure a higher residual field within the part.
(4) Following magnetization, apply
particles in liquid suspension. The application
should be liberal and in a manner to cause
maximum particle buildup. Immersion of
small parts such as rod end fittings in a container of suspension, which has just been
stirred for about 30 seconds, is an excellent
method.
(5) Check for the presence of particle
accumulation in the sharp radii. It is necessary
that the level of magnetization and the particle
application result in the formation of nonrelevant indications. Lack of indications will require remagnetization to a higher level, more
care in applying the particles, or both.
(6) Wash the parts in a clean suspension
vehicle only enough to remove the weaklyheld particle accumulations causing the nonrelevant indications. Particles at true cracks
will be more strongly held and will persist if
the washing is gently done. This can be accomplished by flowing or directing a stream of
liquid vehicle over the part, or for a small
component, by gently stirring in a container of
the vehicle. Closely observe the removal of
the nonrelevant particle accumulations in the
region to be examined to avoid excessive
washing. If washing is prolonged beyond the
minimum needed to remove the nonrelevant
indications, the small defect indications may
also be washed away. A few trials will help to
develop the best method and time required for
washing.
(7) Check for crack indications with
optical magnification and ample lighting. The
smaller indications that are attainable by this
procedure cannot be reliably seen or evaluated
with the unaided eye.
