AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 5: PENETRANT INSPECTION

5-63. CLEANERS AND APPLICATIONS.
Use a cleaner to remove contaminants from
parts prior to the application of penetrant inspection materials. After the inspection is
completed, penetrant inspection material residues are removed. The following cleaners are
commonly used during the penetrant inspection process.
a. Detergents. Detergent cleaners are
water-based chemicals called surfactants,
which surround and attach themselves to particles of contaminants allowing them to be
washed away.
b. Solvents. Solvents dissolve contaminants such as oils, greases, waxes, sealants,
paints, and general organic matter so they can
easily be wiped away or absorbed on a cloth.
They are also used to remove Method C penetrant material prior to developer application.
c. Alkalies. Alkaline cleaners are water
solutions of chemicals that remove contaminants by chemical action or displacement
rather than dissolving the contaminant.
d. Paint Removers. The general types of
removers used for conventional paint coatings
are solvent, bond release, and disintegrating.
e. Salt Baths. Molten salt baths are used
in removing heavy, tightly-held scale and oxide from low alloy steels, nickel, and cobaltbase alloys, and some types of stainless steel.
They cannot be used on aluminum, magnesium, or titanium alloys.
f. Acids. Solutions of acids or their salts
are used to remove rust, scale, corrosion products, and dry shop contamination. The type of
acid used and its concentration depends on the
part material and contaminants to be removed.
g. Etching Chemicals. Etching chemicals
contain a mixture of acids or alkalies plus inhibitors. They are used to remove a thin layer
of surface material, usually caused by a mechanical process, that may seal or reduce the
opening of any discontinuities. The type of
etching solution used depends on the part material and condition.
h. Penetrant Application. Apply the
penetrant by spraying, brushing, or by completely submerging the part in a container of
penetrant. Wait the recommended amount of
time after the penetrant has been applied to
allow it to enter any discontinuities
(1) Removal of Excess Penetrant. Excess penetrant must be removed from the
part’s surface to prevent a loss of contrast between indications of discontinuities and the
background during the inspection. Removal
may require actually washing or spraying the
part with a cleansing liquid, or may simply require wiping the part clean with a solventmoistened cloth. The removal method is determined by the type of penetrant used.
(2) Drying. If removal of the excess
penetrant involves water or other cleaning liquids, drying of the part may be required prior
to developer application. When drying is required, the time can be decreased by using ovens or ventilation systems.
i. Developer Application. Apply developer after excess penetrant is removed and,
where required, the surface is dried. Apply the
developer in a thin uniform layer over the surface to be inspected. Developer acts like a
blotter to assist the natural capillary action
bleed-out of the penetrant from discontinuities
and to spread the penetrant at discontinuity
surface edges to enhance bleed-out indications.
After the developer is applied, allow sufficient
time for the penetrant to be drawn out of any
discontinuities. Follow the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
j. Inspection for Discontinuities. After
the penetrant has sufficiently developed, visually inspect the surface for indications from
discontinuities. Evaluate each indication observed to determine if it is within acceptable
limits. Visible penetrant inspection is performed in normal visible white light, whereas
fluorescent penetrant inspection is performed
in black (ultraviolet) light.
k. Post-Cleaning. Remove inspection
material residues from parts after completion
of penetrant inspection. This residue could
interfere with subsequent part processing, or if
left on some alloys, it could increase their susceptibility to hydrogen embrittlement, intergranular corrosion, and stress corrosion during
service.
