AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 4: MAGNETIC PARTICLE INSPECTION

5-41. PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION.
Magnetic particle inspection uses the tendency
of magnetic lines of force, or flux, of an applied field to pass through the metal rather
than through the air. A defect at or near the
metal’s surface distorts the distribution of the
magnetic flux and some of the flux is forced to
pass out through the surface. (See figure 5-9.)
The field strength is increased in the area of
the defect and opposite magnetic poles form
on either side of the defect. Fine magnetic
particles applied to the part are attracted to
these regions and form a pattern around the defect. The pattern of particles provides a visual
indication of a defect. (See figure 5-10.)
[FIG 5-9] Magnetic field disrupted.
[FIG 5-10] Crack detection by magnetic particle inspection.
a. To locate a defect, it is necessary to
control the direction of magnetization, and flux
lines must be perpendicular to the longitudinal
axes of expected defects. Examination of
critical areas for defects may require complete
disassembly. Two methods of magnetization,
circular and longitudinal, are used to magnetize the part and induce perpendicular flux
paths. Parts of complex configuration may require local magnetization to ensure proper
magnetic field direction and adequate removal
of surface coatings, sealants, and other similar
compounds. Possible adverse influence of the
applied or residual magnetic fields on delicate
parts such as instruments, bearings, and
mechanisms may require removal of these
parts before performing the inspection.
b. Certain characteristics inherent in
the magnetic particle method may introduce
errors in examination results. Nonrelevant errors are caused by magnetic field distortions
due to intentional design features, such as:
(1) Sharp radii, less than 0.10 inch radius, in fillets;
(2) Thread roots, keyways, and drilled
holes; and
(3) Abrupt changes in geometry or in
magnetic properties within the part.
c. Operators must understand nonrelevant error indications and recognize them
during examination. Proper analysis of indications in these regions will require considerable skill and experience, and supplemental
methods may be required before a final
evaluation can be made. Special techniques
for examination of these areas are given in
subsequent paragraphs.
