AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 2: VISUAL INSPECTION

5-17. BORESCOPES. These instruments
are long, tubular, precision optical instruments
with built-in illumination, designed to allow
remote visual inspection of internal surfaces or
otherwise inaccessible areas. The tube, which
can be rigid or flexible with a wide variety of
lengths and diameters, provides the necessary
optical connection between the viewing end
and an objective lens at the distant, or distal tip
of the borescope. Rigid and flexible borescopes are available in different designs for a
variety of standard applications and manufacturers also provide custom designs for specialized applications. Figure 5-1 shows three
typical designs of borescopes.
a. Borescopes Uses. Borescopes are used
in aircraft and engine maintenance programs to
reduce or eliminate the need for costly teardowns. Aircraft turbine engines have access
ports that are specifically designed for borescopes. Borescopes are also used extensively in
a variety of aviation maintenance programs to
determine the airworthiness of difficult-toreach components. Borescopes
typically are used to inspect interiors of hydraulic cylinders and valves for pitting, scoring, porosity, and tool marks; inspect for
cracked cylinders in aircraft reciprocating engines; inspect turbojet engine turbine blades
and combustion cans; verify the proper placement and fit of seals, bonds, gaskets, and subassemblies in difficult to reach areas; and assess Foreign Object Damage (FOD) in aircraft,
airframe, and powerplants. Borescopes may
also be used to locate and retrieve foreign objects in engines and airframes.
b. Optical Designs. Typical designs for
the optical connection between the borescope
viewing end and the distal tip are:
(1) A rigid tube with a series of relay
lenses;
(2) A flexible or rigid tube with a bundle of optical fibers; and
(3) A flexible or rigid tube with wiring
that carries the image signal from a Charge
Couple Device (CCD) imaging sensor at the
distal tip.
These designs can have either fixed or adjustable focusing of the objective lens at the distal
tip. The distal tip may also have prisms and
mirrors that define the direction and field of
view. A fiber optic light guide with white
light is generally used in the illumination system, but ultraviolet light can also be used to
inspect surfaces treated with liquid fluorescent
penetrant or to inspect for contaminants that
fluoresce. Some borescopes with long working lengths use light-emitting diodes at the
distal tip for illumination.
