AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 2: VISUAL INSPECTION

5-16. SIMPLE VISUAL INSPECTION
AIDS. It should be emphasized that the eyemirror-flashlight is a critical visual inspection
process. Aircraft structure and components
that must be routinely inspected are frequently
located beneath skin, cables, tubing, control
rods, pumps, actuators, etc. Visual inspection
aids such as a powerful flashlight, a mirror
with a ball joint, and a 2 to 10 power magnifying glass are essential in the inspection process.
a. Flashlights. Flashlights used for aircraft inspection should be suitable for industrial use and, where applicable, safety approved by the Underwriters Laboratory or
equivalent agency as suitable for use in hazardous atmospheres such as aircraft fuel tanks.
Military Specification MIL-F-3747E, flashlights: plastic case, tubular (regular, explosionproof, explosion-proof heat resistant, traffic directing, and inspection-light), provides requirements for flashlights suitable for use in
aircraft inspection. However, at the present
time, the flashlights covered by this specification use standard incandescent lamps and there
are no standardized performance tests for
flashlights with the brighter bulbs: Krypton,
Halogen, and Xenon. Each flashlight manufacturer currently develops its tests and provides information on its products in its advertising literature. Therefore, when selecting a
flashlight for use in visual inspection, it is
sometimes difficult to directly compare products. The following characteristics should be
considered when selecting a flashlight: footcandle rating; explosive atmosphere rating;
beam spread (adjustable, spot, or flood); efficiency (battery usage rate); brightness after
extended use; and rechargeable or standard
batteries. (If rechargeable, how many hours of
continuous use and how long is required for
recharging?) If possible, it would be best to
take it apart and inspect for quality of construction and to actually use the flashlight like
it would be used in the field. Inspection flashlights are available in several different bulb
brightness levels:
(1) Standard incandescent (for longbattery life).
(2) Krypton (for 70 percent more light
than standard bulbs).
(3) Halogen (for up to 100 percent more
light than standard bulbs).
(4) Xenon (for over 100 percent more
light than standard bulbs).
b. Inspection Mirrors. An inspection
mirror is used to view an area that is not in the
normal line of sight. The mirror should be of
the appropriate size to easily view the component, with the reflecting surface free of dirt,
cracks, worn coating, etc., and a swivel joint
tight enough to maintain its setting.
c. Simple Magnifiers. A single converging lens, the simplest form of a microscope, is often referred to as a simple magnifier. Magnification of a single lens is determined by the equation M = 10/f. In this equation, “M” is the magnification, “f” is the focal
length of the lens in inches, and “10” is a constant that represents the average minimum
distance at which objects can be distinctly seen
by the unaided eye. Using the equation, a lens
with a focal length of 5 inches has a magnification of 2, or is said to be a two-power lens.
