AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 7: ULTRASONIC INSPECTION

5-95. BOND TESTING INSTRUMENTS.
Standard ultrasonic inspection instruments can
be used for bond testing as previously noted;
however, a wide variety of bond testing instruments are available for adaptation to specific bonded structure inspection problems.
a. General Principle. Two basic operating principles are used by a variety of bond
testers for single-sided bond inspection.
(1) Ultrasonic resonance. Sound waves
from a resonant transducer are transmitted into
and received from a structure. A disbond in
the structure will alter the sound wave characteristics, which in turn affect the transducer
impedance.
(2) Mechanical impedance. Lowfrequency, pulsed ultrasonic energy is generated into a structure. Through ultrasonic mechanical vibration of the structure, the impedance or stiffness of the structure is measured,
analyzed, and displayed by the instrumentation.
b. Operation. In general, operation of the
adhesive bond test instruments noted is similar. The test probe is moved over the surface
in smooth overlapping strokes. The direction
of the stroke with regard to the surface is generally immaterial; however, when using the
Sondicator models, the direction of the stroke
becomes critical when the test probe is
[FIG 5-21] Examples of bonded structure configurations
and suggested inspection coverage.
[TABLE 5-7] Acceptable ultrasonic inspection methods associated
shown in figure 5-21.
NUMBER ACCEPTABLE
1 Either
(a) Pulse-echo straight or angle beam, on each side
or
(b) Through-transmission.
2 Pulse-echo, straight beam,
3 Refer to 1 for methods. If all
power to detect reference defects in the reference standard, then the ringing
method, applied from both sides, should be used. Otherwise, the ringing method
is unacceptable.
4 Either
(a) Ringing, on each skin of the doubler.
or
(b) Through-transmission
or
(c) Damping.
5 Ringing.
6 Through-transmission. Dotted
7 Either
(a) Through-transmission
or
(b) Damping.
NOTE
A variety of ultrasonic testing methods and instruments
problems. Other bond inspection instruments can be
proven on the applicable reference standards for each
struments,
which can be used for the inspection of bonded
Tester, Acoustic Flaw Detector, Audible Bond Tester,
dascope 2100.
with the example bonded structure configurations
METHODS
on each skin.
these methods fail to have sufficient penetration
Line represents beam direction.
are available for adaptation to specific inspection
used if detailed procedures are developed and
configuration of interest. Some representative instructures are; the Sondicator, Harmonic Bond
Fokker Bond Tester, 210 Bond Tester, and BonTABLE 5-8. Ultrasonic inspection methods for bonded structures.
INSPECTION METHOD
THROUGH- PULSE-ECHO RINGING DAMPING
TRANSMISSION
Advantages Applicable to Applicable
structures with ei- tures with either thick plex shapes. structures with either thick or thin or thin facing sheets. ther thick or thin
facing sheets. Detects small near facing sheets.
Determines which surface unbonds
Applicable to side is unbonded. (larger than di- Applicable to mulstructures with ameter of search tiple-layered (more
multiple layers Detects small un- unit). than two layers)
bonded over hon- bonds. structures.
eycomb core.
Detects broken, Detects unbonds
Detects unbonds crushed, and cor- on either side.
on either side roded core.
Detects broken, In some cases water bonds (larger than
crushed, and cor- in core can be de- diameter of reroded core. tected. ceiving search
In some cases
water in core can
be detected.
Disadvantages Access to both Inspection
sides of part is re- sides required, does near surface un- doublers and lamiquired. not detect far side bonds, works best nate-type strucunbonds. on unbonds be- tures.
Does not deter- tween top sheet
mine layer position Applicable only to and adhesive, may Access to both
of unbonds. skin-to-honeycomb miss other un- sides required.
core structures. bonds.
Alignment of Does not detersearch units is Reduced effective- Reduced effective- mine layer posicritical. ness on structures ness on thick skins. tions of unbonds.
with multiple skins
Couplant is re- over honeycomb Couplant required. Couplant required.
quired. core.
Inspection rate is Couplant required.
slow.
to struc- Applicable to com- Applicable to
Detects small ununit).
from both Applicable only to Applicable only to
operated near a surface edge. Edge effects on
vibration paths give a test reading that may be
misinterpreted. To avoid edge effects, the test
probe should be moved so that the inspection
path follows the surface edge, giving a constant edge for the test probe to inspect. Edge
effects are more pronounced in thicker material. To interpret meter readings correctly, the
operator should determine whether there are
variations in the thickness of the material.
c. Probe Sending Signal. With the exception of the Sondicator models, the test
probes of the testers emit a sending signal that
radiates in a full circle. The sending signal of
the Sondicator probe travels from one transducer tip to the other. For this reason, the test
probe should be held so that the transducer tips
are at right angles to the inspection path.
When inspecting honeycomb panels with a
Sondicator model, the transducer tips should
be moved consistently in the direction of the
ribbon of the honeycomb or at right angles to
the ribbon so that a constant subsurface is presented.
