AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 7: ULTRASONIC INSPECTION

5-94. INSPECTION OF BONDED
STRUCTURES. Ultrasonic inspection is
finding increasing application in aircraft
bonded construction and repair. Detailed techniques for specific bonded structures should be
obtained from the OEM’s manuals, or FAA requirements. In addition, further information
on the operation of specific instruments should
be obtained from the applicable equipment
manufacturer manuals.
a. Types of Bonded Structures. Many
configurations and types of bonded structures
are in use in aircraft. All of these variations
complicate the application of ultrasonic inspections. An inspection method that works
well on one part or one area of the part may
not be applicable for different parts or areas of
the same part. Some of the variables in the
types of bonded structures are as follows.
(1) Top skin material is made from different materials and thickness.
(2) Different types and thickness of adhesives are used in bonded structures.
Note:
All dimensions in inches followed by
[FIG 5-18] Example of position fixture and shoe.
[FIG 5-19] Example of the use if a transducer
[FIG 5-20] Example of a typical reference
centimeters in parentheses.
positioning fixture.
standard.
(3) Underlying structures contain differences in; core material, cell size, thickness,
and height, back skin material and thickness,
doublers (material and thickness), closure
member attachments, foam adhesive, steps in
skins, internal ribs, and laminates (number of
layers, layer thickness, and layer material).
(4) The top only or top and bottom skin
of a bonded structure may be accessible.
b. Application of Ultrasonic Inspection.
Application to bonded structures must be examined in detail because of the many inspection methods and structural configurations.
The advantages and limitations of each inspection method should be considered, and
reference standards (representative of the
structure to be inspected) should be ultrasonically inspected to verify proposed techniques.
c. Internal Configuration. Complete information on the internal configuration of the
bonded test part must be obtained by the inspector. Drawings should be reviewed, and
when necessary, radiographs of the test part
should be taken. Knowledge of details such as
the location and boundaries of doublers, ribs,
etc., is required for valid interpretation of ultrasonic inspection results. The boundaries of
internal details should be marked on the test
part using a grease pen or other easily removable marking.
d. Reference Standards. Standards can
be a duplicate of the test part except for the
controlled areas of unbond. As an option,
simple test specimens, which represent the
varied areas of the test part and contain controlled areas of unbond, can be used. Reference standards must meet the following requirements.
(1) The reference standard must be
similar to the test part regarding material, geometry, and thickness. This includes
containing: closure members, core splices,
stepped skins, and internal ribs similar to the
test part if bonded areas over or surrounding
these details are to be inspected.
(2) The reference standard must contain
bonds of good quality except for controlled areas of unbond fabricated as explained below.
(3) The reference standard must be
bonded using the adhesive and cure cycle prescribed for the test part.
e. Types of Defects. Defects can be separated into five general types to represent the
various areas of bonded sandwich and laminate
structures as follows:
(1) Type I. Unbonds or voids in an
outer skin-to-adhesive interface.
(2) Type II. Unbonds or voids at the
adhesive-to-core interface.
(3) Type III. Voids between layers of a
laminate.
(4) Type IV. Voids in foam adhesive or
unbonds between the adhesive and a closure
member at core-to-closure member joints.
(5) Type V. Water in the core.
f. Fabrication of NDI Reference Standards. Every ultrasonic test unit should have
sample materials that contain unbonds equal to
the sizes of the minimum rejectable unbonds
for the test parts. Information on minimum
rejectable unbond sizes for test parts should be
obtained from the OEM’s manuals, FAA requirements, or the cognizant FAA Aircraft
Certification Office (ACO) engineer. One or
more of the following techniques can be used
in fabricating reference defects; however, since
bonding materials vary, some of the methods
may not work with certain materials.
(1) Standards for Types I, II, III, and IV
unbonds can be prepared by placing discs
of 0.006 inch thick (maximum) Teflon sheets
over the adhesive in the areas selected for unbonds. For Type II unbonds, the Teflon is
placed between the core and adhesive. The
components of the standard are assembled and
the assembly is then cured.
(2) Types I, II, and III standards can
also be produced by cutting flat-bottomed
holes of a diameter equal to the diameter of the
unbonds to be produced. The holes are cut
from the back sides of bonded specimens, and
the depths are controlled to produce air gaps at
the applicable interfaces. When using this
method, patch plates can be bonded to the rear
of the reference standard to cover and seal
each hole.
(3) Type II standards can be produced
by locally undercutting (before assembly) the
surface of the core to the desired size unbond.
The depth of the undercut should be sufficient
to prevent adhesive flow causing bonds between the undercut core and the skin.
(4) Type IV standards can be produced
by removing the adhesive in selected areas
prior to assembly.
(5) Type V standards can be produced
by drilling small holes in the back of the standard and injecting varying amounts of water
into the cells with a hypodermic needle. The
small holes can then be sealed with a small
amount of water-resistant adhesive.
g. Inspection Coverage. Examples of
several different configurations of bonded
structure along with suggested inspection coverages with standard ultrasonic test instruments are shown in figure 5-21. In many
cases, access limitations will not permit application of the suggested inspections in all of the
areas shown. The inspection coverages and
suggested methods contained in figure 5-21
and table 5-7 are for reference only. Details of
the inspection coverage and inspections for a
particular assembly should be obtained from
the OEM’s manuals, or other FAA-approved
requirements.
h. Inspection Methods. Table 5-8 lists
the various inspection methods for bonded
structures along with advantages and disadvantages of each inspection method.
