AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 2: VISUAL INSPECTION

5-18. VISUAL INSPECTION PROCEDURES. Corrosion can be an extremely critical defect. Therefore, NDI personnel should
be familiar with the appearance of common
types of corrosion and have training and
[FIG 5-1] Typical borescope designs.
experience on corrosion detection on aircraft
structure and engine materials. (Reference:
AC 43-4A, Corrosion Control for Aircraft, for
additional information on corrosion.
a. Preliminary Inspection. Perform a
preliminary inspection of the overall general
area for cleanliness, presence of foreign objects, deformed or missing fasteners, security
of parts, corrosion, and damage. If the configuration or location of the part conceals the
area to be inspected, use visual aids such as a
mirror or borescope.
b. Corrosion Treatment. Treat any corrosion found during preliminary inspection
after completing a visual inspection of any selected part or area.
NOTE: Eddy current, radiography,
or ultrasonic inspection can determine the loss of metal to corrosion.
c. Lighting. Provide adequate lighting to
illuminate the selected part or area.
d. Personal Comfort. Personal comfort
(temperature, wind, rain, etc.) of the inspector
can be a factor in visual inspection reliability.
e. Noise. Noise levels while conducting a
visual inspection are important. Excessive
noise reduces concentration, creates tension,
and prevents effective communication. All
these factors will increase the likelihood of errors.
f. Inspection Area Access. Ease of access to the inspection area has been found to
be of major importance in obtaining reliable
visual inspection results. Access consists of
the act of getting into an inspection position
(primary access) and doing the visual inspection (secondary access). Poor access can affect
the inspector’s interpretation of discontinuities,
decision making, motivation, and attitude.
g. Precleaning. Clean the areas or surface
of the parts to be inspected. Remove any contaminates that might hinder the discovery of
existing surface indications. Do not remove
the protective finish from the part or area prior
to inspection. Removal of the finish may be
required at a later time if other NDI techniques
are required to verify any visual indications of
flaws that are found.
h. Inspection. Carefully inspect the area
for discontinuities, using optical aids as
required. An inspector normally should have
available suitable measuring devices, a flashlight, and a mirror.
(1) Surface cracks. When searching for
surface cracks with a flashlight, direct the light
beam at a 5 to 45 degree angle to the inspection surface, towards the face. (See figure 5-2.) Do not direct the light beam at such
an angle that the reflected light beam shines directly into the eyes. Keep the eyes above the
reflected light beam during the inspection.
Determine the extent of any cracks found by
directing the light beam at right angles to the
crack and tracing its length. Use a 10-power
magnifying glass to confirm the existence of a
suspected crack. If this is not adequate, use
other NDI techniques, such as penetrant, magnetic particle, or eddy current to verify cracks.
(2) Other surface discontinuities. Inspect for other surface discontinuities, such as:
discoloration from overheating; buckled,
bulging, or dented skin; cracked, chafed, split,
or dented tubing; chafed electrical wiring; delaminations of composites; and damaged protective finishes.
i. Recordkeeping. Document all discrepancies by written report, photograph, and/or
video recording for appropriate evaluation.
The full value of visual inspection can be realized only if records are kept of the discrepancies found on parts inspected. The size and
shape of the discontinuity and its location on
the part should be recorded along with other
pertinent information, such as rework performed or disposition. The inclusion on a report of some visible record of the discontinuity
makes the report more complete.
[FIG 5-2] Using a flashlight to inspect
5-19.5-24.
[RESERVED.]
for cracks.
SECTION 3. EDDY CURRENT INSPECTION
