AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 4: MAGNETIC PARTICLE INSPECTION

5-48. MAGNETIZATION.
a. Circular. Circular magnetization is induced in the part by the central-conductor
method or the direct-contact method. (See figure 5-11.)
(1) Indirect Induction (central-conductor method). Pass the current through a central
conductor that passes through the part. When
several small parts are examined at one time,
provide sufficient space between each
[FIG 5-11] Circular magnetization.
piece to permit satisfactory coverage (with
particles), magnetization, and examination.
(2) Direct Induction (contact method).
Pass current through the part mounted horizontally between contact plates. As an example, circular magnetization of a round steel bar
would be produced by placing the ends of the
steel bar between the heads of the magnetic inspection machine and passing a current
through the bars. Magnetic particles applied
either during or after passage of the current, or
after passage of the current in magneticallyretentive steels, would disclose discontinuities
parallel to the axis of the bar.
NOTE: Exercise extreme caution to
prevent burning of the part at the
electrode contact areas. Some causes
of overheating and arcing are: insufficient contact area, insufficient contact
pressure, dirty or coated contact areas, electrode removal during current
flow, and too high an amperage setting.
b. Longitudinal. Longitudinal magnetization is induced in a part by placing the part
in a strong magnetic field, such as the center of
a coil or between the poles of an electromagnetic yoke. (See figure 5-12.) When using a
coil, optimum results are obtained when the
following conditions are met.
(1) The part to be examined is at least
twice as long as it is wide.
(2) The long axis of the part is parallel
to the axis of the coil opening.
[FIG 5-12] Longitudinal magnetization.
(3) The area of the coil opening is at
least 10 times the cross-sectional areas of the
part.
(4) The part is positioned against the
inner wall of the coil.
(5) Three to five turns are employed for
hand-held coils formed with cables.
(6) For the 10-to-1 fill factor, the effective region of inspection is 1 coil radius on either side of the coil with 10 percent overlap.
(Refer to ASTME-1444.)
(7) The intensity of the longitudinal
shots is kept just below the level at which
leakage fields develop across sharp changes of
section, such as radii under bolt heads, threads,
and other sharp angles in parts. This does not
apply when checking chrome-plated parts for
grinding cracks.
(a) For example, longitudinal magnetization of a round steel bar would be produced by placing the DC coil around the bar.
After application of the magnetic particles, either during or subsequent to magnetization,
discontinuities perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the bar would be disclosed.
(b) When a yoke is used, the portion
of the part between the ends of the yoke completes the path of the magnetic lines of force.
This results in a magnetic field between the
points of contact.
c. Permanent Magnets and Electromagnetic Yoke. The stability of the magnetic
field generated by permanent magnets requires
some agitation of the oxide particles within the
field. The wet method is considered most satisfactory. Use a well-agitated plastic squirt
bottle for the most effective application of the
magnetic particle suspension. When the direction of possible cracks in a suspect area is
not known, or would not necessarily be normal
to the lines of force between the poles of the
magnet, reposition the magnet to the best advantage and recheck. Usually, two shots,
90 degrees apart are required. The part must
be demagnetized between each magnetization
when the field direction is changed unless the
next shot is at least 10 percent stronger than
the previous shot, if this is the case demagnetization is not necessary.
