AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 1: GENERAL

5-7. TYPES OF INSPECTIONS. Nondestructive testing methods are techniques used
both in the production and in-service environments without damage or destruction of the
item under investigation. Examples of NDI
methods are as follows:
a. Visual inspection
b. Magnetic particle
c. Penetrants
d. Eddy current
e. Radiography
f. Ultrasonic
g. Acoustic emission
h. Thermography
i. Holography
j. Shearography
k. Tap testing
[TABLE 5-1] Advantages and disadvantages of NDI methods.
METHOD ADVANTAGES
VISUAL Inexpensive
Highly portable Generally only large discontinuities
Immediate results Misinterpretation of scratches
Minimum training
Minimum part preparation
DYE PENETRANT Portable
Inexpensive Rough or porous surfaces interfere with test
Sensitive to very small discontinuities Part preparation required
30 min. or less to accomplish (removal of finishes and sealant, etc.)
Minimum skill required High degree of cleanliness required
MAGNETIC Can be portable
PARTICLE Inexpensive
Sensitive to small discontinuities Part preparation required
Immediate results (removal of finishes and sealant, etc.)
Moderate skill required Semi-directional requiring general
Detects surface and subsurface discontinuities orientation of field to discontinuity
Relatively fast Ferro-magnetic materials only
EDDY Portable
CURRENT Detects surface and subsurface discontinuities
Moderate speed Electrically conductive materials
Immediate results Skill and training required
Sensitive to small discontinuities Time consuming for large areas
Thickness sensitive
Can detect many variables
ULTRASONIC Portable
Inexpensive Rough surfaces interfere with test
Sensitive to very small discontinuities Highly sensitive to sound beam -
Immediate results discontinuity orientation
Little part preparation High degree of skill required to set up and
Wide range of materials and thickness can interpret
be inspected Couplant usually required
X-RAY Detects surface and internal flaws
Can inspect hidden areas Very expensive (slow process)
RADIOGRAPHY
Permanent test record obtained Highly directional, sensitive to flaw orientation
Minimum part preparation High degree of skill and experience required for
ISOTOPE Portable
RADIOGRAPHY Less expensive than X-ray
Detects surface and internal flaws handling and use
Can inspect hidden areas Highly directional, sensitive to flaw orientation
Permanent test record obtained High degree of skill and experience required for
Minimum part preparation exposure and interpretation
5-8.5-14.
[RESERVED.]
DISADVANTAGES
Surface discontinuities only
Locate surface defects only
Direct visual detection of results required
Surface must be accessible
Rough surfaces interfere with test
Part must be demagnetized after test.
Surface must be accessible to probe
Rough surfaces interfere with test
Surface must be accessible to probe
Safety hazard
exposure and interpretation
Depth of discontinuity not indicated
Safety hazard
Must conform to Federal and State regulations for
Depth of discontinuity not indicated
SECTION 2. VISUAL INSPECTION
