AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 7: ULTRASONIC INSPECTION

5-93. BASIC EQUIPMENT. Most ultrasonic inspection systems include the following
basic equipment; portable instruments (frequency range 0.5 to 15 MHz), transducers
(longitudinal and shear wave), positioners, reference standards, and couplant.
a. Ultrasonic Instruments. A portable,
battery-powered ultrasonic instrument is used
for field inspection of airplane structure. (See
figure 5-17.) The instrument generates an
[FIG 5-15] Ultrasound.
[FIG 5-16] Pulse-echo and through-transmission ultrasonic inspection techniques.
[FIG 5-17] Typical portable ultrasonic inspection instrument.
ultrasonic pulse, detects and amplifies the returning echo, and displays the detected signal
on a cathode ray tube or similar display. Piezoelectric transducers produce longitudinal or
shear waves, which are the most commonly
used wave forms for aircraft structural inspection.
b. Positioning Fixtures. To direct ultrasound at a particular angle, or to couple it into
an irregular surface, transducer positioning
fixtures and sound-coupling shoes are employed. (See figure 5-18.) Shoes are made of
a plastic material that has the necessary soundtransmitting characteristics. Positioning fixtures are used to locate the transducer at a prescribed point and can increase the sensitivity
of the inspection. (See figure 5-19.) If a
transducer shoe or positioning fixture is required, the inspection procedure will give a
detailed description of the shoe or fixture.
c. Reference Standards. Reference standards are used to calibrate the ultrasonic instrument (see figure 5-20), reference standards
serve two purposes to provide an ultrasonic response pattern that is related to the part being
inspected, and to establish the required inspection sensitivity. To obtain a representative response pattern, the reference standard configuration is the same as that of the test structure,
or is a configuration that provides an ultrasonic
response pattern representative of the test
structure. The reference standard contains a
simulated defect (notch) that is positioned to
provide a calibration signal representative of
the expected defect. The notch size is chosen
to establish inspection sensitivity (response to
the expected defect size). The inspection procedure gives a detailed description of the required reference standard.
d. Couplants. Inspection with ultrasonics
is limited to the part in contact with the transducer. A layer of couplant is required to couple the transducer to the test piece because ultrasonic energy will not travel through air.
Some typical couplants used are: water, glycerin, motor oils, and grease.
