AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 9: ACOUSTIC-EMISSION

5-112. GENERAL. Acoustic-Emission is an
NDI technique that involves the placing of
acoustical-emission sensors at various locations on the aircraft structure and then applying
a load or stress. The level of stress applied
need not reach general yielding, nor does the
stress generally need to be of a specific type.
Bending stress can be applied to beamed
structures, torsional stress can be applied to
rotary shafts, thermal stresses can be applied
with heat lamps or blankets, and pressure-induced stress can be applied to pressure-containment systems such as the aircraft
fuselage. The materials emit sound and stress
waves that take the form of ultrasonic pulses
changes in geometry, in which case a standard
of some sort is required. The entire area of
interest must be tapped. The surface should be
dry and free of oil, grease, and dirt. Tap testing is limited to finding relatively shallow defects in skins with a thickness less than
.080 inch. In a honeycomb structure, for example, the far side bondline cannot be evaluated, requiring two-side access for a complete
inspection. This method is portable, but no records are produced. The accuracy of this test
depends on the inspector’s subjective interpretation of the test response; therefore, only
qualified personnel should perform this test.
that can be picked up by sensors. Cracks and
areas of corrosion in the stressed airframe
structure emit sound waves (different frequencies for different size defects) which are registered by the sensors. These acoustic-emission
bursts can be used both to locate flaws and to
evaluate their rate of growth as a function of
applied stress. Acoustic-emission testing has
an advantage over other NDI methods in that it
can detect and locate all of the activated flaws
in a structure in one test. Acoustic-emission
testing does not now provide the capability to
size flaws, but it can greatly reduce the area
required to be scanned by other NDI methods.
