AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 4: MAGNETIC PARTICLE INSPECTION

5-51. DEMAGNETIZATION AND POSTEXAMINATION CLEANING. Parts should
be magnetized longitudinally last before demagnetizing.
NOTE: Circular magnetism cannot
be read with a field meter since it is an
internal magnetic field. However, if
the last shot, was a coil shot the meter
can read it if a magnetic field is present.
a. Demagnetization. Demagnetize between successive magnetization of the same
part, to allow finding defects in all directions,
and whenever the residual magnetism interferes with the interpretation of the indications.
Also, demagnetize all parts and materials after
completion of magnetic particle examination.
Test all parts at several locations and parts for
residual magnetism of complex configuration
at all significant changes in geometry. Repeat
demagnetization if there is any appreciable deflection of the field indicator needle.
(1) AC method. Hold the part in the
AC demagnetizing coils and then move the
part slowly and steadily through the coils and
approximately 3 to 4 feet past the coils. Repeat this process until the part loses its residual
magnetism. Rotate and tumble parts of complex configuration as they are passed through
the coils.
(2) DC method. Place the part in the
same relative position as when magnetized and
apply reversing DC current. Gradually reduce
the current to zero and repeat the process until
the residual magnetic field is depleted.
b. Post-Examination Cleaning.
(1) When oil suspensions are used, solvent clean or remove the part until all magnetic
particles and traces of oil are removed.
(2) When parts or materials have been
examined using water suspension methods,
completely remove the water by any suitable
means, such as an air blast, to ensure that the
parts are dried immediately after cleaning.
Thoroughly rinse the part with a detergentbase cleaner until all magnetic particles are
removed. Then rinse in a solution of water
and rust inhibitor.
(3) For cadmium-plated parts an airwater vapor blast may be used to remove any
remaining magnetic particle residue.
(4) After final cleaning and drying, use
temporary protective coatings, when necessary,
to prevent corrosion.
(5) After magnetic particle examination
has been completed, restore any removed finishes according to the manufacturer’s repair
manual.
NOTE: Visible penetrant is often
used interchangeably by NDI personnel with fluorescent penetrant. However, the chemical within most common red dye penetrants will neutralize
the fluorescence of the chemicals used
in that method. Therefore, a thorough
cleaning of all magnetic particles is
mandatory.
5-52.5-59.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 5. PENETRANT INSPECTION
