AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 5: NONDESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION (NDI)  Section 5: PENETRANT INSPECTION

5-60. GENERAL. Penetrant inspection is
used on nonporous metal and nonmetal components to find material discontinuities that are
open to the surface and may not be evident to
normal visual inspection. The part must be
clean before performing a penetrant inspection.
The basic purpose of penetrant inspection is to
increase the visible contrast between a discontinuity and its background. This is accomplished by applying a liquid of high penetrating power that enters the surface opening of a
discontinuity. Excess penetrant is removed
and a developer material is then applied that
draws the liquid from the suspected defect to
reveal the discontinuity. The visual evidence
of the suspected defect can then be seen either
by a color contrast in normal visible white
light or by fluorescence under black ultraviolet
light. (See figure 5-13.)
a. The penetrant method does not depend upon ferro-magnetism like magnetic particle inspection, and the arrangement of the
discontinuities is not a factor. The penetrant
method is effective for detecting surface defects in nonmagnetic metals and in a variety of
nonmetallic materials. Penetrant inspection is
also used to inspect items made from ferromagnetic steels and its sensitivity is generally
greater than that of magnetic particle inspection. Penetrant inspection is superior to visual
inspection but not as sensitive as other advanced forms of tests for detection of
in-service surface cracks.
b. The major limitations of the penetrant
inspection is that it can detect only those discontinuities that are open to the surface; some
other method must be used for detecting subsurface defects. Surface roughness or porosity
can limit the use of liquid penetrants. Such
surfaces can produce excessive background
indications and interfere with the inspection.
Penetrant inspection can be used on most airframe parts and assemblies accessible to its
application. The basic steps to perform penetrant inspections are briefly described in the
following paragraphs.
