AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 6: CORROSION, INSPECTION & PROTECTION  Section 4: CORROSION PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE

6-51. GUIDELINES: AIRCRAFT OPERATING OVER SALT WATER. In addition to the inspection and treatment prescribed
above, the following treatment shall be applied:
a. Remove all traces of salt water and salt
water residue by thoroughly washing the aircraft with fresh water.
(1) After drying, coat the propeller,
hubs, blades and other unpainted or unprotected parts of the engine and its installation
parts by spraying or rubbing lightly with corrosion preventive compound, Specification
MIL-C-16173, Grade 4.
(2) Apply this mixture on parts that
move or require some lubrication and on all
fittings subject to corrosion such as landing
gear retracting plungers, control surface
hinges, control cables, exposed rivets and
bolts, and other similar parts not protected by
paint. Apply with a cloth or a soft brush
soaked in the mixture.
(3) Wipe off excess mixture. When applying the mixture take care that as little as
possible is deposited on exhaust pipes or collector rings to avoid a fire hazard when the engine is started. Keep the ignition wires, propeller anti-icer feed hose, tires, and other rubber parts free of the mixture.
b. Where maximum corrosion protection
is desired on stationary parts, use exterior surface corrosion preventive compound, Specification MIL-C-16173, grade I.
c. Wipe the exposed portion of the landing gear shock strut piston with a cloth soaked
in the applicable hydraulic fluid.
d. Most parts of landing gear wheels are
made from magnesium or aluminum alloys
which corrode rapidly unless carefully protected. When the aircraft operates near salt
water and off coral beaches, the corrosion can
be very rapid. Inspect wheels to determine the
paint condition.
e. Refinish portions of a wheel where
paint has deteriorated, peeled, or chipped.
f. Except for friction and bearing surfaces, apply a protective coating to all parts of
wheels and brake assemblies.
6-52.6-62.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 5. VISUAL CORROSION
