AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 6: CORROSION, INSPECTION & PROTECTION  Section 8: ALUMINUM AND ALUMINUM ALLOYS

6-136. EXAMPLES OF REMOVING
CORROSION FROM ALUMINUM AND
ALUMINUM ALLOYS.
a. Positively identify the metal as aluminum.
b. Clean the area to be reworked. Strip
paint if required.
c. Determine extent of corrosion damage.
d. Remove light to moderate corrosion
with one of the following.
(1) Non-Powered Corrosion Removal.
(a) The removal of corrosion products by hand can be accomplished by use of
aluminum grit and silicon carbide abrasive,
such as non-woven, non-metallic, abrasive mat
(Spec. MIL-A-9962), abrasive cloth, and paper. Aluminum wool, fiber bristle brushes, and
pumice powder are also acceptable methods.
(b) Stainless steel brush (Spec.
H-B-178, type III, class 2) may be used as long
as the bristles do not exceed 0.010 inch in diameter. After use of this brush the surface
should be polished with 60 grit aluminum oxide abrasive paper, then with 400 grit aluminum oxide paper. Care should be exercised in
any cleaning process to avoid breaking the
protective film.
(c) Steel wool, emery cloth, steel
wire brushes (except stainless steel brush)
copper alloy brushes, rotary wire brushes, or
severe abrasive materials should not be used
on any aluminum surface.
(2) Chemical Corrosion Removal.
(a) The corrosion removal compound
aluminum pretreatment MIL-C-38334, an acid
material, may be used to remove corrosion
products from aluminum alloy materials or
items (e.g., skins, stringer, ribs in wings, tubing, or ducts). MIL-C-38334 is available in
two types:
1 Type I Liquid concentrate materials should be diluted in accordance with the
manufacture’s instructions before use. Type I
has a 1 year shelf life; therefore it shall not be
used after 1 year from the date of manufacture.
2 Type II Powdered concentrate
materials should be dissolved in the volume of
water specified on the kit. These materials
have an indefinite shelf life in the dry state.
Once mixed, they should be used within
90 days.
(b) Mix MIL-C-38334 in wood,
plastic, or plastic-lined containers only. Wear
acid-resistant gloves, protective mask and
protective clothing when working with this
acid compound. If acid contacts the skin or
eyes, flush immediately with water.
(c) Apply MIL-C-38334 solution by
flowing, mopping, sponging, brushing, or
wiping. When applying the solution to large
areas, begin the application at the lowest area
and work upward, applying the solution with a
circular motion to disturb the surface film and
ensure proper coverage. If pumping is required, pumps, valves, and fittings should be
manufactured from 18-8 stainless steel or
plastic.
CAUTION: When working with
MIL-C-38334, keep the solution away
from magnesium surfaces. The solution must be confined to the area being treated. All parts and assemblies
including cadmium-plated items and
hinges susceptible to damage from
acid should be masked and/or protected. Also mask all openings leading
to the primary structure that could
trap the solution and doors or other
openings that would allow the solution
(uncontrolled) to get into the aircraft
or equipment interior. It is a good
practice to keep a wet rag on hand at
all times, for removal of spills or
splashes.
(d) Allow the solution to remain on
the surface for approximately 12 minutes and
then rinse away with clean tap water. For pitted or heavily-corroded areas the compound
will be more effective if applied warm
(140 °F) followed by vigorous agitation with a
non-metallic acid-resisting brush or aluminum
oxide abrasive nylon mat. Allow sufficient
dwell time, 12 to 15 minutes, before rinsing.
After each application examine the pits and/or
corroded area to determine if another application is required with a 4 to 10 power magnifying glass. (Select the power depending on the
distance available to make the inspection.)
Corrosion still on the area will appear as a
powdery crust slightly different in color than
the uncorroded base metal. Darkening of area
due to shadows and reaction from the acid remover should not be considered.
(e) Once the corrosion has been removed and the area well-rinsed with clean
water, a chromate conversion coating such as
MIL-C-81706 or MIL-C-5541 alodine 1200,
must be applied immediately thereafter.
e. Remove moderate to heavy corrosion
with one of the following.
(1) Powered Corrosion Removal.
(a) Where the problem is severe
enough to warrant the use of power tools, a
pneumatic drill motor driving either an aluminum-oxide-impregnated nylon abrasive wheel,
flap brush or rubber grinding wheel may be
used with an abrasive value to approximately
120 grit, as needed. Corrosion-removal accessories, such as flap brushes or rotary files,
should be used on one type of metal only. For
example, a flap brush used to remove aluminum should not be used to remove magnesium,
steel, etc. Pneumatic sanders may be used
with disk and paper acceptable for use on aluminum.
(b) When mechanically removing
corrosion from aluminum, especially aircraft
skin thinner than 0.0625 inch, extreme care
must be used. Vigorous, heavy, continuous
abrasive grinding can generate enough heat to
cause metallurgical change. If heat damage is
suspected, hardness tests or conductivity tests
must be accomplished to verify condition of
the metal. The use of powered rotary files
should be limited to heavy corrosion and
should not be used on skin thinner than
0.0625 inch.
(2) Blasting.
(a) Abrasive blasting may be used on
aluminum alloys using glass beads (Spec.
MIL-G-9954) sizes 10 to 13, or grain abrasive
(Spec. MIL-G-5634) types I and III may be
used as an alternate method of removing corrosion from clad and non-clad aluminum alloys. Abrasive blasting should not be used to
remove heavy corrosion products. Direct pressure machines should have the nozzle pressure
set at 30 to 40 psi for clad aluminum alloys
and 40 to 45 psi for non-clad aluminum alloys.
Engineering approval should be obtained prior
to abrasive blasting metal thinner than
0.0625 inch.
(b) When using abrasive blasting on
aluminum alloys, do not allow the blast stream
to dwell on the same spot longer than
15 seconds. Longer dwell times will cause excessive metal removal. Intergranular exfoliation corrosion is not to be removed by abrasive
blasting; however, blasting may be used with
powered corrosion removal to determine
whether all exfoliation corrosion has been removed.
f. Inspect the area for remaining corrosion. Repeat procedure if any corrosion remains.
NOTE: If corrosion remains after the
second attempt, use a stronger
method, e.g., chemical to mechanical.
g. Using a blend ratio of 20:1 (length to
depth) blend and finish the corrosion rework
area with progressively finer abrasive paper
until 400-grit paper is used.
h. Clean reworked area using dry cleaning
solvent. Do not use kerosene or any other petroleum base fuel as a cleaning solvent.
i. Determine depth of faired depressions
to ensure that rework limits have not been exceeded.
j. Apply chemical conversion coating,
MIL-C-81706, immediately after reworking. If
48 hours or more have elapsed since the conversion coating was first applied and the
primer or final paint system has not yet been
applied, then reapply the conversion coating
before continuing.
NOTE: These solutions should not be
allowed to come in contact with magnesium or high-strength steels
(180,000 psi). Do not permit solutions
or materials to contact paint thinner,
acetone or other combustible material:
FIRE MAY RESULT.
k. Apply paint finish to area.
6-137.6-147.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 9. MAGNESIUM AND MAGNESIUM ALLOYS
