AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 6: CORROSION, INSPECTION & PROTECTION  Section 6: CORROSION REMOVAL PROCEDURES

6-91. CORROSION CONTROL WORK
PROCEDURES. The effectiveness of corrosion control depends on how well basic work
procedures are followed. The following common work practices are recommended:
a. If rework procedures or materials are
unknown, contact the aircraft manufacturer or
FAA authorized Designated Engineering Representative (DER) before proceeding.
b. The work areas, equipment, and components should be clean and free of chips, grit,
dirt, and foreign materials.
c. Do not mark on any metal surface with
a graphite pencil or any type of sharp, pointed
instrument. Temporary markings (defined as
markings soluble in water or methyl chloroform) should be used for metal layout work or
marking on the aircraft to indicate corroded areas.
d. Graphite should not be used as a lubricant for any component. Graphite is cathodic to all structural metals and will generate
galvanic corrosion in the presence of moisture,
especially if the graphite is applied in dry
form.
e. Footwear and clothing should be inspected for metal chips, slivers, rivet cuttings,
dirt, sand, etc., and all such material removed
before walking or working on metal surfaces
such as wings, stabilizers, fuel tanks, etc.
f. Do not abrade or scratch any surface
unless it is an authorized procedure. If surfaces are accidentally scratched, the damage
should be assessed and action taken to remove
the scratch and treat the area.
g. Coated metal surfaces should not be
polished for aesthetic purposes. Buffing
would remove the protective coating and a
brightly polished surface is normally not as
corrosion resistant as a non-polished surface
unless it is protected by wax or paint.
h. Protect surrounding areas when
welding, grinding, or drilling, to prevent contamination with residue from these operations.
In those areas where protective covering cannot be used, remove the residue by cleaning.
i. Severely corroded screws, bolts, and
washers should be replaced. When a protective coating, such as a cadmium plating on
bolts, or screws, is damaged, immediately apply an appropriate protective finish to prevent
additional corrosion damage.
6-92.6-112.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 7. BASIC CORROSION
