AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 6: CORROSION, INSPECTION & PROTECTION  Section 14: HANDLING AND CARE OF AIRCRAFT RECOVERED FROM WATER IMMERSION

6-223. AIRFRAME. The salvable components of the fuselage, wings, empennage, seaplane and amphibian hulls and floats, and
movable surfaces should be processed as follows:
a. The fabric from fabric-covered surfaces should be removed and replaced.
b. Clean the aircraft interior and exterior
using steam under pressure with steam cleaning compound. Direct the steam into all seams
and crevices where corrosive water may have
penetrated. Avoid steam cleaning electrical
equipment, such as terminal boards and relays.
c. Areas that have been steam cleaned
should be rinsed immediately with either hot
or cold fresh water.
d. Touch up all scratches and scars on
painted surfaces using zinc chromate primer or
preservative.
e. Undrained hollow spaces or fluid entrapment areas should be provided temporary
draining facilities by drilling out rivets at the
lowest point. Install new rivets after drainage.
f. Remove and replace all leather, fabric
upholstery, and insulation. Plastic or rubber
foam that cannot be cleaned of all corrosive
water must be replaced.
g. All drain plugs or drive screws in tubular structures should be removed and the
structure blown out with compressed air. If
water has reached the tubular interiors, carefully flush with hot fresh water and blow out
water with compressed air. Roll the structure
as necessary to remove water from pockets.
Fill the tubes with hot linseed oil, approximately 180 °F, drain oil and replace drain
plugs or drive screws.
h. Clean sealed wood, metallic, and other
non-metallic areas, excluding acrylic plastics,
with warm water. Replace wood, metalite, and
other porous materials exposed to waterimmersion unless surfaces are adequately
sealed to prevent penetration by water. Virtually all solvents and phenolic type cleaning
agents are detrimental to acrylics and will either soften the plastic or cause crazing.
i. Remove instruments and radios and applicable cables and plumbing, and repair and
inspect as necessary.
6-224.6-234.
[RESERVED.]
CHAPTER 7. AIRCRAFT HARDWARE,
AND TURNBUCKLES
SECTION 1. RIVETS
