AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 6: CORROSION, INSPECTION & PROTECTION  Section 9: MAGNESIUM AND MAGNESIUM ALLOYS

6-148. GENERAL. Magnesium and magnesium alloys are the most chemically active
of the metals used in aircraft construction and
are the most difficult to protect. However, corrosion on magnesium surfaces is probably the
easiest to detect in its early stages. Since magnesium corrosion products occupy several
times the volume of the original magnesium
metal destroyed, initial signs show a lifting of
the paint films and white spots on the magnesium surface. These rapidly develop into
snow-like mounds or even white whiskers.
The prompt and complete correction of the
coating failure is imperative if serious structural damage is to be avoided.
6-149. TREATMENT OF WROUGHT
MAGNESIUM SHEETS AND FORGINGS.
Corrosive attack on magnesium skins will usually occur around the edges of skin panels, underneath hold-down washers, or in areas
physically damaged by shearing, drilling, abrasion, or impact. Entrapment of moisture under
and behind skin crevices is frequently a contributing factor. If the skin section can be easily removed, this should be accomplished to
ensure complete inhibition and treatment.
a. Complete mechanical removal of corrosion products should be practiced when
practical. Mechanical cleaning should normally be limited to the use of stiff bristle
brushes and similar nonmetallic cleaning tools.
b. Any entrapment of steel particles
from steel wire brushes, steel tools, or contamination of treated surfaces, or dirty abrasives, can cause more trouble than the initial
corrosive attack. The following procedural
summary is recommended for treatment of corroded magnesium areas when accomplished
under most field conditions.
c. When aluminum insulating washers
are used and they no longer fasten tightly to
magnesium panels, corrosion is likely to occur
under the washers if corrective measures are
not taken.
(1) When machine screw fasteners are
used, aluminum insulating washers must be
removed from all locations to surface treat the
magnesium panel.
(2) Where permanent fasteners other
than machine screws are used, the insulating
washer and fastener must be removed.
(3) When located so water can be
trapped in the counter-bored area where the
washer was located, use sealants to fill the
counterbore. If necessary, fill several areas
adjacent to each other. It may be advantageous
to cover the entire row of fasteners with a strip
of sealant.
6-150. REPAIR OF MAGNESIUM
SHEET METAL AFTER EXTENSIVE
CORROSION REMOVAL. The same general instructions apply when making repairs in
magnesium as in aluminum alloy skin, except
that two coats of epoxy primer may be required on both the doubler and skin being
patched instead of one. Where it is difficult to
form magnesium alloys in the contour, aluminum alloy may be utilized. When this is done,
it is necessary to ensure effective dissimilar
metal insulation. Vinyl tape will ensure positive separation of dissimilar metals, but edges
will still have to be sealed to prevent entrance
of moisture between mating surfaces at all
points where repairs are made. It is recommended that only non-corrosive type sealant be
used, since it serves a dual purpose of material
separation and sealing.
6-151. IN-PLACE TREATMENT OF
MAGNESIUM CASTINGS. Magnesium
castings, in general, are more porous and more
prone to penetrating attack than wrought magnesium skin. However, treatment in the field
is, for all practical purposes, the same for all
magnesium. Bellcranks, fittings, and numerous covers, plates, and handles may also be
magnesium castings. When attack occurs on a
casting, the earliest practical treatment is required to prevent dangerous corrosive penetration. Engine cases in salt water can develop
moth holes and complete penetration overnight.
a. If at all practical, faying surfaces involved shall be separated to treat the existing
attack effectively and prevent its further progress. The same general treatment sequence as
detailed for magnesium skin should be followed. Where engine cases are concerned,
baked enamel overcoats are usually involved
rather than other top coat finishes. A good air
drying enamel can be used to restore protection.
b. If extensive removal of corrosion
products from a structural casting is involved,
a decision from the aircraft manufacturer or a
DER may be necessary to evaluate the adequacy of structural strength remaining. Refer
to the aircraft manufacturer if any questions of
safety are involved.
6-152. EXAMPLE OF REMOVING
CORROSION FROM MAGNESIUM. If
possible, corroded magnesium parts shall be
removed from aircraft. When impossible to
remove the part, the following procedure will
be used.
a. Positively identify metal as magnesium.
b. Clean area to be reworked.
c. Strip paint if required.
d. Determine the extent of corrosion
damage.
e. Remove light to moderate corrosion by
one of the following means.
(1) Non-Powered Corrosion Removal.
(a) Non-powered removal can be accomplished using abrasive mats, cloth, and paper with aluminum oxide grit (do not use silicon carbide abrasive). Metallic wools and
hand brushes compatible with magnesium such
as stainless steel and aluminum, may be used.
(b) When a brush is used the bristles
should not exceed 0.010 inch in diameter.
After using a brush, the surface should be polished with 400 grit aluminum oxide abrasive
paper, then with 600 grit aluminum oxide
abrasive paper.
(c) Pumice powder may be used to
remove stains or to remove corrosion on thin
metal surfaces where minimum metal removal
is allowed.
(2) Chemical Corrosion Removal.
(a) Chemical corrosion removal on
magnesium alloys is usually done with a
chromic acid pickle solution. Chemical corrosion removal methods are not considered adequate for areas that have:
1 Deep pitting,
2 Heavy corrosion and corrosion
by products,
3 Previously had corrosion removed by mechanical means, or
4 Previously been sand blasted.
(b) Do not use this method for parts
containing copper and steel-based inserts (unless the inserts are masked off) and where it
might come into contact with adhesive bonded
skins or parts.
(3) The following solution may be used
to remove surface oxidation and light corrosion products from magnesium surfaces.
(a) Solution Composition and Operation:
1 Chromium Trioxide. 24 oz.
2 (O-C-303, Type II). Water to
Make 1 gal. Reaction Time 1 to 15 min.
3 Operation Temperature. (Solution can be operated at room temperature for a
longer reaction time if desired.) 190 to 202 °F.
4 Container Construction. Leadlined steel, stainless steel, or 1100 aluminum.
(b) Mask off nearby operating
mechanisms, cracks and plated steel to keep
the solution from attacking them.
(c) Apply chromic acid solution carefully to the corroded area with an acid-resistant
brush.
(d) Allow the solution to remain on
the surface for approximately 15 minutes.
Agitation may be required.
(e) Thoroughly rinse the solution
from the surface with plenty of clean water.
(f) Repeat the preceding sequence as
necessary until all corrosion products have
been removed and the metal is a bright metallic color.
f. Remove moderate to heavy corrosion by
one of the following means.
(1) Powered Corrosion Removal.
(a) Powered corrosion removal can
be accomplished using pneumatic drill motor
with either an aluminum-oxide-impregnated
abrasive wheel, flap brush, or rubber grinding
wheel with an abrasive value to approximately
120 grain size.
(b) Also a rotary file with fine flutes
can be used for severe or heavy corrosion
product buildup on metals thicker than
0.0625 inch. If a flap brush or rotary file is
used, it should only be used on one type of
metal. Do not use either a hand or rotary carbon steel brush on magnesium.
(c) Pneumatic sanders are acceptable
if used with disk or paper of aluminum oxide.
When using sanders, use extra care to avoid
over heating aircraft skins thinner than
0.0625 inch.
(d) Do not use rotary wire brushes on
magnesium.
WARNING: Cuttings and small
shavings from magnesium can ignite
easily and are an extreme fire hazard.
Fires of this metal must be extinguished with absolutely dry talc, calcium carbonate, sand, or graphite by
applying the powder to a depth of
1/2 inch over the metal.
(2) Blasting. Abrasive blasting is an
approved method of corrosion removal on
magnesium alloys of a thickness greater than
0.0625 inch. Remove heavy corrosion products by hand brushing with a stainless steel or
fiber brush followed by vacuum abrasive
blasting with glass beads, (Spec. MIL-G-9954)
sizes 10-13; or grain abrasive (Spec.
MIL-G-5634), types I or III at an air pressure
of 10 to 35 psi (if suction equipment is used,
use a 50 percent higher pressure). Upon completion of blasting, inspect for the presence of
corrosion in the blast area. Give particular attention to areas where pitting has progressed
into intergranular attack. This is necessary because abrasive blasting has a tendency to close
up streaks of intergranular corrosion rather
than remove them if the operator uses an improper impingement angle. If the corrosion
has not been removed in a total blasting time
of 60 seconds on any one specific area, other
mechanical methods of removal should be
utilized.
CAUTION: When blasting magnesium alloys, do not allow the blast
stream to dwell on the same spot
longer than 15 seconds. Longer dwell
times will cause excessive metal removal.
g. Inspect the reworked area to ensure
that no corrosion products remain. If corrosion
products are found, repeat method used and
re-inspect.
h. Fair depressions resulting from rework
using a blend ratio of 20:1. Clean rework area
using 240 grit abrasive paper. Smooth with
300 grit and finally polish with 400 grit abrasive paper.
i. Determine depth of faired depressions
to ensure that rework limits have not been exceeded. Refer to the manufacture’s specifications.
j. Clean reworked area using a solvent to
provide a water-break-free surface. Do not use
kerosene or another petroleum base fuel as a
cleaning solvent.
k. Apply Chromic Acid Brush-on Pretreatment.
(1) Chemical pretreatment such as the
following chromic acid solution (Conversion
coat conforming to Spec. MIL-M-3171,
type VI) provides a passive surface layer with
an inhibitive characteristic that resists corrosive attack and also provides a bond for subsequent coatings. Properly-applied magnesium
pretreatment tend to neutralize corrosion media in contact with the surface.
(2) The chromic acid brush-on pretreatment may be applied to all magnesium
parts that require touch-up. This treatment is
generally used in refinishing procedures or
when parts and assemblies are too large to be
immersed. This treatment is less critical to apply than the other brush-on treatments. It is
relatively inexpensive and not as harmful when
trapped in faying surfaces.
(a) Solution Composition and Operation:
1 Distilled Water 1 gal.
2 Chromic Acid (CrO ) 1.3 oz.
3
3 (99.5 pure), Calcium Sulfate
1 oz. (CaSo .2H O)
4 2
4 Operating Temp. 70-90 °F.
5 Container: Stainless Steel, Aluminum, Vinyl, Polyethylene, or Rubber.
NOTE: Good application requires
proper preparation of the chromic
acid coating solution and cleaning of
the surface where the solution will be
applied. A water-break test is recommended if the cleanliness of the surface is in doubt.
(b) Add chemicals to water in the order shown.
(c) Stir vigorously for at least
15 minutes, either mechanically or by air agitation, to ensure that the solution is saturated
with calcium sulfate. (Let solution stand for
15 minutes before decanting.)
(d) Prior to use, decant solution
(avoid transfer of undissolved calcium sulfate)
into suitable containers (polyethylene or glass).
(e) Apply solution by brush, swab, or
flow on using low-pressure spray (nonatomizing) until the metal surface becomes a
dull color (the color can vary from greenbrown, brassy, yellow-brown to dark-brown).
For good paint adhesion, a dark-brown color
free of powder is considered best. The color
may vary in using different vendors’ materials.
NOTE: Too long an exposure to the
brush-on solution produces coatings
that will powder and impair adhesion
of applied paint finish/films.
(f) Observe the coating closely during the treatment for color changes, rinsed with
cold running water when the desired condition/color is reached and air dried. Preparation
and use of test panels made of the same material and under the same conditions, before
starting the actual treating operation may be
used as to determine the application time required to produce the required coating. A
good coating is uniform in color/density, adheres well and is free of loose powder.
l. Apply primer and top coat finish
m. Remove masking and protective coverings.
6-153.6-163.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 10. FERROUS METALS
