AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 6: CORROSION, INSPECTION & PROTECTION  Section 1: GENERAL

6-2. FACTORS INFLUENCING CORROSION.
a. Some factors which influence metal
corrosion and the rate of corrosion are:
(1) Type of metal;
(2) Heat treatment and grain direction;
(3) Presence of a dissimilar, less corrodible metal;
(4) Anodic and cathodic surface areas
(in galvanic corrosion);
(5) Temperature;
(6) Presence of electrolytes (hard water,
salt water, battery fluids, etc.);
(7) Availability of oxygen;
(8) Presence of biological organisms;
(9) Mechanical stress on the corroding
metal; and,
(10) Time of exposure to a corrosive
environment.
(11) Lead/graphite pencil marks on aircraft surface metals.
b. Most pure metals are not suitable for
aircraft construction and are used only in combination with other metals to form alloys.
Most alloys are made up entirely of small
crystalline regions, called grains. Corrosion
can occur on surfaces of those regions which
are less resistant and also at boundaries between regions, resulting in the formation of
pits and intergranular corrosion. Metals have a
wide range of corrosion resistance. The most
active metals, (those which lose electrons easFIGURE 6-1. Simplified corrosion cell showing conditions which
[FIG 6-2] Elimination of corrosion by application of an organic
ily), such as magnesium and aluminum, corrode easily. The most noble metals (those
which do not lose electrons easily), such as
gold and silver, do not corrode easily.
must exist for electrochemical corrosion.
film to metal surface.
c. Corrosion is quickened by hightemperature environments that accelerate
chemical reactions and increase the concentration of water vapor in the air.
d. Electrolytes (electrically-conducting
solutions) form on surfaces when condensation, salt spray, rain, or rinse water accumulate.
Dirt, salt, acidic gases, and engine exhaust
gases can dissolve on wet surfaces, increasing
the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte,
thereby increasing the rate of corrosion.
e. When some of the electrolyte on a
metal surface is partially confined, (such as
between faying surfaces or in a deep crevice)
the metal around this area corrodes more rapidly. This type of corrosion is called an oxygen
concentration cell. Corrosion occurs more
rapidly because the reduced oxygen content of
the confined electrolyte causes the adjacent
metal to become anodic to other metal surfaces
on the same part that are immersed in electrolyte or exposed to air.
f. Slime, molds, fungi, and other living
organisms (some microscopic) can grow on
damp surfaces. Once they are established, the
area usually remains damp, increasing the possibility of corrosion.
g. Manufacturing processes such as machining, forming, welding, or heat treatment
can leave residual stress in aircraft parts and
can cause cracking in a corrosive environment.
