AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 7: AIRCRAFT HARDWARE, CONTROL CABLES, AND TURNBUCKLES  Section 7: SAFETYING

7-124. SAFETY-WIRING PROCEDURES.
There are many combinations of safety wiring
with certain basic rules common to all applications. These rules are as follows.
a. When bolts, screws, or other parts are
closely grouped, it is more convenient to safety
wire them in series. The number of bolts, nuts,
screws, etc., that may be wired together depends on the application.
b. Drilled boltheads and screws need not
be safety wired if installed with self-locking
nuts.
c. To prevent failure due to rubbing or
vibration, safety wire must be tight after installation.
d. Safety wire must be installed in a manner that will prevent the tendency of the part to
loosen.
e. Safety wire must never be overstressed. Safety wire will break under vibrations if twisted too tightly. Safety wire must
be pulled taut when being twisted, and maintain a light tension when secured. (See figure 7-3a.)
f. Safety-wire ends must be bent under
and inward toward the part to avoid sharp or
projecting ends, which might present a safety
hazard.
g. Safety wire inside a duct or tube must
not cross over or obstruct a flow passage when
an alternate routing can be used.
(1) Check the units to be safety wired to
make sure that they have been correctly torqued, and that the wiring holes are properly
aligned to each other. When there are two or
more units, it is desirable that the holes in the
units be aligned to each other. Never overtorque or loosen to obtain proper alignment of the
holes. It should be possible to align the wiring
holes when the bolts are torqued within the
specified limits. Washers may be used (see
paragraph 7-37) to establish proper alignment.
However, if it is impossible to obtain a proper
alignment of the holes without undertorquing
or overtorquing, try another bolt which will
permit proper alignment within the specified
torque limits.
(2) To prevent mutilation of the twisted
section of wire, when using pliers, grasp the
wires at the ends. Safety wire must not be
nicked, kinked, or mutilated. Never twist the
wire ends off with pliers; and, when cutting off
ends, leave at least four to six complete turns
(1/2 to 5/8 inch long) after the loop. When
removing safety wire, never twist the wire off
with pliers. Cut the safety wire close to the
hole, exercising caution.
h. Install safety wire where practicable
with the wire positioned around the head of the
bolt, screw, or nut, and twisted in such a manner that the loop of the wire fits closely to the
contour of the unit being safety wired.
