AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 7: AIRCRAFT HARDWARE, CONTROL CABLES, AND TURNBUCKLES  Section 7: SAFETYING

7-123. SAFETY WIRE. Do not use stainless steel, monel, carbon steel, or aluminum
alloy safety wire to secure emergency mechanisms such as switch handles, guards covering
handles used on exits, fire extinguishers,
emergency gear releases, or other emergency
equipment. Some existing structural equipment or safety-of-flight emergency devices require copper or brass safety wire (.020 inch diameter only). Where successful emergency
operation of this equipment is dependent on
shearing or breaking of the safety wire, particular care should be used to ensure that safetying does not prevent emergency operation.
a. There are two methods of safety
wiring; the double-twist method that is most
commonly used, and the single-wire method
used on screws, bolts, and/or nuts in a closelyspaced or closed-geometrical pattern such as a
triangle, square, rectangle, or circle. The single-wire method may also be used on parts in
electrical systems and in places that are difficult to reach. (See figures 7-3 and 7-3a.)
b. When using double-twist method of
safety wiring, .032 inch minimum diameter
wire should be used on parts that have a hole
diameter larger than .045 inch. Safety wire of
.020 inch diameter (double strand) may be
used on parts having a nominal hole diameter
between .045 and .062 inch with a spacing
between parts of less than 2 inches. When
using the single-wire method, the largest size
wire that the hole will accommodate should be
used. Copper wire (.020 inch diameter), aluminum wire (.031 inch diameter), or other
similar wire called for in specific technical orders, should be used as seals on equipment
such as first-aid kits, portable fire extinguishers, emergency valves, or oxygen regulators.
CAUTION: Care should be taken not
to confuse steel with aluminum wire.
c. A secure seal indicates that the component has not been opened. Some emergency
devices require installation of brass or soft
[FIG 7-3] Securing screws, nuts, bolts, and snaprings.
FIGURE 7-3a. Wire twisting by hand.
copper shear safety wire. Particular care
should be exercised to ensure that the use of
safety wire will not prevent emergency operation of the devices.
