AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 7: AIRCRAFT HARDWARE, CONTROL CABLES, AND TURNBUCKLES  Section 7: SAFETYING

7-126. SECURING OIL CAPS, DRAIN
COCKS, AND VALVES. (See figure 7-4a.)
When securing oil caps and drain cocks, the
safety wire should be anchored to an adjacent
fillister-head screw. This method of safety
wiring is applied to wingnuts, filler plugs, single-drilled head bolts, fillister-head screws,
etc.; which are safety wired individually.
When securing valve handles in the vertical
position, the wire is looped around the threads
of the pipe leading into one side of the valve,
[FIG 7-4] Use of a typical wire twister.
FIGURE 7-4a. Securing oil caps, drain cocks, and valves.
double-twisted around the valve handle, and
anchored around the threads of the pipe leading into the opposite side of the valve. When
castellated nuts are to be secured with safety
wire, tighten the nut to the low side of the selected torque range, unless otherwise specified;
and, if necessary, continue tightening until a
slot lines with the hole. In blind tapped hole
applications of bolts or castellated nuts on
studs, the safety wiring should be in accordance with the general instructions of this
chapter. Hollow-head bolts are safetied in the
manner prescribed for regular bolts.
NOTE: Do not loosen or tighten
properly tightened nuts to align
safety-wire holes.
NOTE: Although there are numerous
safety wiring techniques used to secure aircraft hardware, practically all
are derived from the basic examples
shown in figures 7-5 through 7-5b.
Examples 1, 2, 3, and 4 apply to all types of bolts,
similar parts which are wired so that the loosening
of the other part. The direction of twist from the
ples 1, 3, and 4 to keep the loop in position against
second to the third unit in example 2 is clockwise
The wire entering the hole in the third unit will be
counterclockwise twist after it leaves the hole, the
bolt.
Examples 5, 6, 7, & 8 show methods for wiring various
over the unit rather than around it when wiring castellated
ance problem.
Example 9 shows the Hollow-head
method for wiring bolts in be wired
different planes. Note that the tab bent
wire should always be ap- hole to avoid
plied so that tension is in possible injury
the tightening direction. nel working
[FIG 7-5] Safety-wiring procedures.
fillister-head screws, square-head plugs, and other
tendency of either part is counteracted by tightening
second to the third unit is counterclockwise in examthe head of the bolt. The direction of twist from the
to keep the wire in position around the second unit.
the lower wire, except example 2, and by making a
loop will be secured in place around the head of that
standard items, NOTE: Wire may be wrapped
nuts or on other items when there is a clearplugs shall Correct application of single
as shown with wire to closely spaced multiinside the ple group.
snags and
to personon the engine.
Examples 12 and 13 show methods for attaching
Example 14 shows bolt Example 15 shows
wired to a right-angle method for wiring
bracket with the wire connecting rod.
wrapped around the
bracket.
Fittings incorporating wire lugs shall be wired as shown
ples 17 and 18. Where no lock-wire lug is provided,
be applied as shown in examples 19 and 20 with
exerted to ensure that wire is wrapped tightly around
FIGURE 7-5a. Safety-wiring procedures.
lead seal to protect critical adjustments.
correct Example 16 shows correct
adjustable method for wiring the coupling nut on flexible line to
the straight connector
brazed on rigid tube.
in Exam- Small size coupling nuts
wire should shall be wired by wrapping
caution being the wire around the nut
the fitting. and inserting it through
the holes as shown.
Coupling nuts attached to straight connectors
shown, when hex is an integral part of the connector.
Straight Connector (Bulkhead Type)
Examples 26, 27, and 28 show the proper
checknut wired independently so that it need not
FIGURE 7-5b. Safety-wiring procedures.
shall be wired as,
Coupling nuts on a tee
shall be wired, as shown
above, so that tension is
always in the tightening direction.
method for wiring various standard fittings with
be disturbed when removing the coupling nut.
