AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 7: AIRCRAFT HARDWARE, CONTROL CABLES, AND TURNBUCKLES  Section 8: INSPECTION AND REPAIR OF CONTROL CABLES AND TURNBUCKLES

7-149. CABLE SYSTEM INSPECTION.
Aircraft cable systems are subject to a variety
of environmental conditions and deterioration.
Wire or strand breakage is easy to visually recognize. Other kinds of deterioration such as
wear, corrosion, and/or distortion are not easily
seen; therefore, control cables should be removed periodically for a more detailed inspection.
a. At each annual or 100 hour inspection, all control cables must be inspected for
broken wires strands. Any cable assembly that
has one broken wire strand located in a critical
fatigue area must be replaced.
b. A critical fatigue area is defined as the
working length of a cable where the cable runs
over, under, or around a pulley, sleeve, or
through a fair-lead; or any section where the
cable is flexed, rubbed, or worked in any manner; or any point within 1 foot of a swaged-on
fitting.
c. A swaged-on fitting can be an eye,
fork, ball, ball and shank, ball and double
shank, threaded stud, threaded stud and turnbuckle, compression sleeve, or any hardware
used as a termination or end fitting on the cable. These fittings may be attached by various
swaging methods such as rotary swaging, roll
swaging, hydraulic pressing, and hand swaging
tools. (See MIL-T-781.) The pressures exerted on the fittings during the swaging process sometimes pinch the small wires in the cable. This can cause premature failure of the
pinched wires, resulting in broken wires.
d. Close inspection in these critical fatigue areas, must be made by passing a cloth
over the area to snag on broken wires. This
will clean the cable for a visual inspection, and
detect broken wires if the cloth snags on the
cable. Also, a very careful visual inspection
must be made since a broken wire will not always protrude or stick out, but may lie in the
strand and remain in the position of the helix
as it was manufactured. Broken wires of this
type may show up as a hairline crack in the
wire. If a broken wire of this type is suspected, further inspection with a magnifying
glass of 7 power or greater, is recommended.
Figure 7-16 shows a cable with broken wires
that was not detected by wiping, but was found
during a visual inspection. The damage became readily apparent when the cable was removed and bent as shown in figure 7-16.
[FIG 7-16] Cable inspection technique.
e. Kinking of wire cable can be avoided
if properly handled and installed. Kinking is
caused by the cable taking a spiral shape as the
result of unnatural twist. One of the most
common causes for this twist is improper unreeling and uncoiling. In a kinked cable,
strands and wires are out of position, which
creates unequal tension and brings excessive
wear at this part of the cable. Even though the
kink may be straightened so that the damage
appears to be slight, the relative adjustment
between the strands has been disturbed so that
the cable cannot give maximum service and
should be replaced. Inspect cables for a
popped core or loose strands. Replace any cable that has a popped core or loose strands regardless of wear or broken wires.
f. Nylon-jacketed cable with any cracks
or necking down in the diameter of the jacket
shall be replaced. Usable cable life is over
when these conditions begin to appear in the
nylon jacket.
g. External wear patterns will extend
along the cable equal to the distance the cable
moves at that location and may occur on one
side of the cable or on its entire circumference.
Replace flexible and nonflexible cables when
the individual wires in each strand appear to
blend together (outer wires worn 40 to 50 percent) as depicted in figure 7-17. Actual instances of cable wear beyond the recommended replacement point are shown in figure 7-18.
[FIG 7-17] Cable wear patterns.
h. As wear is taking place on the exterior
surface of a cable, the same condition is taking
place internally, particularly in the sections of
the cable which pass over pulleys and quadrants. This condition (shown in figure 7-19) is
not easily detected unless the strands of the cable are separated. This type of wear is a result
of the relative motion between inner wire surfaces. Under certain conditions, the rate of this
type of wear can be greater than that occurring
on the surface.
[FIG 7-18] Worn cable (replacement necessary).
i. Areas especially conducive to cable
corrosion are battery compartments, lavatories,
wheel wells, etc.; where a concentration of
corrosive fumes, vapors, and liquids can accumulate. Carefully examine any cable for
corrosion, when it has a broken wire in a section that is not in contact with a wearproducing airframe component, such as a pulley, fair-lead, etc. If the surface of the cable is
corroded, relieve cable tension and carefully
force the cable open by reverse twisting and
visually inspect the interior. Corrosion on the
interior strands of the cable constitutes failure,
and the cable must be replaced. If no internal
corrosion is detected, remove loose external
rust and corrosion with a clean, dry, coarseweave rag, or fiber brush. Do not use metallic
[FIG 7-19] Internal end view of cable wear.
wool or solvents to clean installed cables. Use
of metallic wool will embed dissimilar metal
particles in the cables and create further corrosion problems. Solvents will remove internal
cable lubricant allowing cable strands to
abrade and further corrode. After thorough
cleaning, sparingly apply specification
MIL-C-16173, grade 4, corrosion-preventive
compound to cable. Do not apply the material
so thick that it will interfere with the operation
of cables at fair-leads, pulleys, or grooved
bellcrank areas.
j. Examine cable runs for incorrect routing, fraying, twisting, or wear at fair-leads,
pulleys, antiabrasion strips, and guards. Look
for interference with adjacent structure,
equipment, wiring, plumbing, and other controls. Inspect cable systems for binding, full
travel, and security of attaching hardware.
Check for slack in the cable system by attempting to move the control column and/or
pedals while the gust locks are installed on the
control surfaces. With the gust locks removed,
actuate the controls and check for friction or
hard movement. These are indications that excessive cable tension exists.
NOTE: If the control movement is stiff
after maintenance is performed on control surfaces, check for parallel cables
twisted around each other, or cables
connected in reverse.
k. Check swaged terminal reference
marks for an indication of cable slippage
within the fitting. Inspect the fitting assembly
for distortion and/or broken strands at the terminal. Ensure that all bearings and swivel fittings (bolted or pinned) pivot freely to prevent
binding and subsequent failure. Check turnbuckles for proper thread exposure and broken
or missing safety wires/clips.
l. Inspect pulleys for roughness, sharp
edges, and presence of foreign material embedded in the grooves. Examine pulley bearings to ensure proper lubrication, smooth rotation; and freedom from flat spots, dirt, and
paint spray. During the inspection, rotate the
pulleys, which only turn through a small arc, to
provide a new bearing surface for the cable.
Maintain pulley alignment to prevent the cable
from riding on the flanges and chafing against
guards, covers, or adjacent structure. Check
all pulley brackets and guards for damage,
alignment, and security.
m. Various cable system malfunctions
may be detected by analyzing pulley conditions. These include such discrepancies as too
much tension, misalignment, pulley bearing
problems, and size mismatches between cables
and pulleys. Examples of these condition are
shown in figure 7-20.
[FIG 7-20] Pulley wear patterns.
n. Inspect fair-leads for wear, breakage,
alignment, cleanliness, and security. Examine
cable routing at fair-leads to ensure that defec3°€maximum.
tion angles are no greater than
Determine that all guides and anti-abrasion
strips are secure and in good condition.
o. Examine pressure seals for wear and/or
material deterioration. Seal guards should be
positioned to prevent jamming of a pulley in
case pressure seal fails and pieces slide along
the cable.
