AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 7: AIRCRAFT HARDWARE, CONTROL CABLES, AND TURNBUCKLES  Section 3: BOLTS

7-40. TORQUES. The importance of correct torque application cannot be overemphasized. Undertorque can result in unnecessary
wear of nuts and bolts, as well as the parts they
secure. Overtorque can cause failure of a bolt
or nut from overstressing the threaded areas.
Uneven or additional loads that are applied to
the assembly may result in wear or premature
failure. The following are a few simple, but
important procedures, that should be followed
to ensure that correct torque is applied.
NOTE: Be sure that the torque applied is for the size of the bolt shank
not the wrench size.
a. Calibrate the torque wrench at least
once a year, or immediately after it has been
abused or dropped, to ensure continued accuracy.
b. Be sure the bolt and nut threads are
clean and dry, unless otherwise specified by
the manufacturer.
c. Run the nut down to near contact
with the washer or bearing surface and check
the friction drag torque required to turn the
nut. Whenever possible, apply the torque to
the nut and not the bolt. This will reduce rotation of the bolt in the hole and reduce wear.
d. Add the friction drag torque to the
desired torque. This is referred to as “final
torque,” which should register on the indicator
or setting for a snap-over type torque wrench.
e. Apply a smooth even pull when applying torque pressure. If chattering or a jerking motion occurs during final torque, back off
the nut and retorque.
NOTE: Many applications of bolts in
aircraft/engines require stretch checks
prior to reuse. This requirement is
due primarily to bolt stretching
caused by overtorquing.
f. When installing a castle nut, start
alignment with the cotter pin hole at the minimum recommended torque plus friction drag
torque.
NOTE: Do not exceed the maximum
torque plus the friction drag. If the
hole and nut castellation do not align,
change washer or nut and try again.
Exceeding the maximum recommended torque is not recommended.
g. When torque is applied to bolt heads
or capscrews, apply the recommended torque
plus friction drag torque.
h. If special adapters are used which
will change the effective length of the torque
wrench, the final torque indication or wrench
setting must be adjusted accordingly. Determine the torque wrench indication or setting
with adapter installed as shown in figure 7-2.
i. Table 7-1 shows the recommended
torque to be used when specific torque is not
supplied by the manufacturer. The table includes standard nut and bolt combinations,
currently used in aviation maintenance. For
further identification of hardware, see chapter 7, section 11.
