AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 7: AIRCRAFT HARDWARE, CONTROL CABLES, AND TURNBUCKLES  Section 4: NUTS

7-64. SELF-LOCKING NUTS. These nuts
are acceptable for use on certificated aircraft
subject to the aircraft manufacturer’s recommended practice sheets or specifications. Two
types of self-locking nuts are currently in use,
the all-metal type, and the fiber or nylon type.
a. DO NOT use self-locking nuts on parts
subject to rotation.
b. Self-locking castellated nuts with
cotter pins or lockwire may be used in any
system.
c. Self-locking nuts should not be used
with bolts or screws on turbine engine airplanes in locations where the loose nut, bolt,
washer, or screw could fall or be drawn into
the engine air intake scoop.
d. Self-locking nuts should not be used
with bolts, screws, or studs to attach access
panels or doors, or to assemble any parts that
are routinely disassembled before, or after each
flight. They may be used with anti-friction
bearings and control pulleys, provided the inner race of the bearing is secured to the supporting structure by the nut and bolt.
e. Metal locknuts are constructed with
either the threads in the locking insert, out-ofround with the load-carrying section, or with a
saw-cut insert with a pinched-in thread in the
locking section. The locking action of the allmetal nut depends upon the resiliency of the
metal when the locking section and loadcarrying section are engaged by screw threads.
Metal locknuts are primarily used in high temperature areas.
f. Fiber or nylon locknuts are constructed with an unthreaded fiber or nylon
locking insert held securely in place. The fiber
or nylon insert provides the locking action because it has a smaller diameter than the nut.
Fiber or nylon self-locking nuts are not installed in areas where temperatures exceed
°F.
250 After the nut has been tightened, make
sure the bolt or stud has at least one thread
showing past the nut. DO NOT reuse a fiber
or nylon locknut, if the nut cannot meet the
minimum prevailing torque values. (See table 7-2.)
g. Self-locking nut plates are produced in
a variety of forms and materials for riveting or
welding to aircraft structures or parts. Certain
applications require the installation of selflocking nuts in channel arrangement permitting the attachment of many nuts in a row with
only a few rivets.
