AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 3: EXHAUST SYSTEMS

8-48. INTERNAL MUFFLER FAILURES. Internal failures (baffles, diffusers,
etc.) can cause partial or complete engine
power loss by restricting the flow of the exhaust gases. (See figures 8-17 through 8-20.)
[FIG 8-14] Typical muffler wall failure. (A. Complete muffler
Detail view of failure; C. Cross section of failed muffler.)
As opposed to other failures, erosion and carbonizing caused by the extreme thermal conditions are the primary causes of internal failures. Engine after-firing and combustion of
unburned fuel within the exhaust system are
probable contributing factors.
a. In addition, local hot spot areas
caused by uneven exhaust gas flow, result in
burning, bulging, and rupture of the outer muffler wall. (See figure 8-14.) As might be
assembly with heat shroud removed; B.
expected, the time required for these failures to
develop is longer than that for fatigue failures.
Internal muffler failures account for nearly
20 percent of the total number of exhaust system failures.
b. The highest rate of internal muffler
failures occurs between 500 and 750 hours of
operating time. Engine power loss and excessive back-pressure caused by exhaust outlet
blockage may be averted by the installation
[FIG 8-15] Typical muffler wall fatigue failure. (A.
Complete muffler assembly with heat shroud partially
removed; B. Detailed view of failure.)
[FIG 8-16] Typical fatigue failure of muffler end
plate at stack inlet.
[FIG 8-17] Section of a muffler showing typical
internal baffle failure.
[FIG 8-18] Loose pieces of a failed internal baffle.
of an exhaust outlet guard as shown in figures 8-21a and 8-21b. The outlet guard may
be fabricated from a 3/16-inch stainless steel
welding rod.
Form the rod into two “U” shaped segments,
approximately 3 inches long and weld onto the
exhaust tail pipe as shown in figure 8-21b so
that the guard will extend 2 inches inside the
exhaust muffler outlet port. Installation of an
exhaust outlet guard does not negate the importance of thorough inspection of the internal
parts of the muffler or the necessity of replacing defective mufflers.
