AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 5: INSPECTION OF PROPELLERS

8-94. PROPELLER HUB.
a. Fixed Pitch.
(1) Inspection procedures require removal of the propeller spinner for examination
of the prop hub area. Cracks may be present in
the hub area between or adjacent to bolt holes
and along the hub pilot bore. Cracks in these
areas cannot be repaired and require immediate
scrapping of the propeller.
(2) Propeller attach bolts should be examined for looseness or an unsafetied or
cracked condition. Cracked or broken bolts
are usually the result of overtorquing. Correct
torquing procedures require all bolt threads to
be dry, clean, and free of any lubrication before torquing.
b. Controllable Pitch.
(1) Inspect controllable pitch propellers
frequently to determine that all parts are lubricated properly. It is especially recommended
that all lubrication be accomplished in accordance with the propeller manufacturer’s instructions.
(2) Complete inspection/servicing requires the removal of the spinner for examination and servicing of the propeller hub and
blade clamp area. All inspections and servicing of the pitch control mechanism should
follow the recommendations of the propeller,
engine, and airframe manufacturers. Propellers must be in compliance with applicable
AD’s and manufacturer’s SB’s.
(3) The hub, blade clamps, and pitch
change mechanisms should be inspected for
corrosion from all sources, including rain,
snow, and bird droppings that may have entered through the spinner openings. Examine
the hub area for oil and grease leaks, missing
grease-fitting caps, and leaking or missing
grease fittings.
(4) Propeller domes should be checked
for leaks, both at the seals and on the fill valve
(if so equipped). The dome valve may be leaktested by applying soapy water over the fill
valve end. Domes should be serviced only
with nitrogen or dry air in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations. When propeller domes are inspected and found filled
with oil, the propeller should be removed and
inspected/repaired by an appropriately-rated
repair facility.
(5) It is especially recommended that all
lubrication be accomplished at the periods and
in the manner specified by the propeller manufacturer. On makes and models with a grease
fitting on the hub, before greasing the hub remove the grease fitting opposite the one to
which you are going to add grease. This will
allow the excess grease and pressure to exit
through the grease fitting hole rather than the
hub seal.
(6) Fiber-block, pitch-change mechanisms should be inspected for deterioration, fit,
and the security of the pitch-clamp forks.
(7) Certain models of full-feathering
propellers use spring-loaded pins to retain the
feathered blade position. Spring and pin units
should be cleaned, inspected, and relubricated
per the manufacturer’s recommendations and
applicable AD’s.
(8) Pitch change counterweights on
blade clamps should be inspected for security,
safety, and to ensure that adequate counterweight clearance exists within the spinner.
