AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 2: FUEL SYSTEMS

8-32. FUEL TANKS AND CELLS.
Welded or riveted fuel tanks that are made of
commercially pure aluminum, 3003, 5052, or
similar alloys, may be repaired by welding.
Tanks made from heat-treatable aluminum alloys are generally assembled by riveting. In
case it is necessary to rivet a new piece in a
tank, use the same material as used in the tank
undergoing repair, and seal the seams with a
compound that is insoluble in gasoline. Special sealing compounds are available and
should be used in the repair of tanks. Inspect
fuel tanks and cells for general condition, security of attachment, and evidence of leakage.
Examine fuel tank or cell vent line, fuel line,
and sump drain attachment fittings closely.
[FIG 8-12] Location of clamps at tube bends.
CAUTION: Purge de-fueled tanks of
explosive fuel/air mixtures in accordance with the manufacturer’s service
instructions. In the absence of such
instructions, utilize an inert gas such
as CO as a purgative to assure the to2
tal deletion of fuel/air mixtures.
a. Integral Tanks. Examine the interior
surfaces and seams for sealant deterioration
and corrosion (especially in the sump area).
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for repair and cleaning procedures.
b. Internal Metal Tanks. Check the exterior for corrosion and chafing. Dents or
other distortion, such as a partially-collapsed
tank caused by an obstructed fuel tank vent,
can adversely affect fuel quantity gauge accuracy and tank capacity. Check the interior surfaces for corrosion. Pay particular attention to
the sump area, especially for those of which
sumps are made of cast material. Repairs to
the tank may be accomplished in accordance
with the practices outlined in the chapter 4,
Metal Structure, Welding and Brazing of this
AC.
c. Removal of Flux After Welding. It is
especially important, after repair by welding,
to completely remove all flux in order to avoid
possible corrosion. Promptly upon completion
of welding, wash the inside and outside of the
tank with liberal quantities of hot water and
then drain. Next, immerse the tank in either a
5 percent nitric or 5 percent sulfuric acid solution. If the tank cannot be immersed, fill the
tank with either solution, and wash the outside
with the same solution. Permit the acid to remain in contact with the weld about one hour
and then rinse thoroughly with clean water.
Test the efficiency of the cleaning operation by
applying some acidified 5 percent silver nitrate
solution to small quantity of the rinse water
used last to wash the tank. If a heavy white
precipitate is formed, the cleaning is insufficient and the washing should be repeated.
d. Flexible Fuel Cells. Inspect the interior for checking, cracking, porosity, or other
signs of deterioration. Make sure the cell retaining fasteners are properly positioned. If
repair or further inspection is required, follow
the manufacturer’s instructions for cell removal, repair, and installation. Do not allow
flexible fuel cells to dry out. Preserve them in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
