AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 4: REPAIR OF METAL PROPELLERS

8-76. PROPELLER HUB AND FLANGE
REPAIR. When the fixed-pitch propeller bolt
holes in a hub or crankshaft become damaged
or oversized, it is permissible to make repairs
by using methods (A) or (B) in figure 8-29, or
by use of aircraft standard bolts 1/16-inch
larger than the original bolts. Make the repairs
in accordance with the recommendations of the
propeller metal hub manufacturer or the engine
manufacturer, as applicable. Obtain from the
engine or propeller hub manufacturer suitable
flange bushings with threaded or smooth
bores, as illustrated in methods (A) or (B) of
figure 8-29. Drill the flange and insert the
bushings as recommended by the propeller to
accommodate the bushings, and protect the
holes with 2 coats of aluminum paint or other
high moisture-resistant coating. Use bolts of
the same size as those originally used. Any of
the following combinations may be used:
(1) drilled head bolt and castellated nut,
(2) drilled head bolt and threaded bushing, or
(3) undrilled bolt and self-locking nut. Where
it is desirable to use oversized bolts, obtain
suitable aircraft-standard bolts 1/16-inch larger
than the original bolts. Enlarge the crankshaft
propeller flange holes and the propeller hub
holes sufficiently to accommodate the new
bolts without more than 0.005-inch clearance.
Such reboring will be permitted only once.
Further repairs of bolt holes may be in accordance with the methods listed in (A) or (B) of
figure 8-29.
NOTE: Method (A) or (B) is preferred over the oversized bolt method,
because a propeller hub flange redrilled in accordance with this latter
a. Draw a vertical line at the value of r% =
b. Where the vertical line intersects the curve,
sect the vertical axis.
c. Read the percent reduction in thickness
∆t%
= 4.0
[FIG 8-28] Example 2. Determine the repair thickness limits.
method will always require the redrilling of all new propellers subsequently used with the re-drilled
flange.
