AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 1: ENGINES

8-2. SPECIAL INSPECTION. A visual
inspection is needed to determine the condition
of the engine and its components. An annual
or 100-hour inspection should include the engine and nacelle group as follows.
a. Cold Cylinder Check. If an engine is
running rough the cause may be a bad ignition
lead, a spark plug not firing, a partially clogged
fuel injector, or a bad magneto. The dead cylinder will be colder than the surrounding cylinders and can be quickly determined by using
the recommended cold cylinder checks. This
should be done using a thermocouple probe
which is very sensitive to small differences in
temperature, which is the case with a partiallyclogged injector. For a carbureted engine, the
following check may be helpful:
(1) Using experienced personnel, run
the engine on the bad magneto for approximately 30 seconds at 1200 rpm. Without
switching the magneto switch back to both
shut off the engine. Have another mechanic
use a grease pencil (non-carbon), and quickly
mark each exhaust stack approximately 1 inch
from the flange that holds the exhaust stack to
the cylinder. Next, check the exhaust stacks
and look for the exhaust stack whose grease
EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS
pencil mark has not turned to a grayish-white
or ash color. This is the cold cylinder.
(2) The probable cause of the cold cylinder is either a defective spark plug or ignition lead. Switch spark plugs to another cylinder and run the test again. If the problem stays
with the original cylinder, the problem is either
the ignition lead or the magneto.
b. Piston Engine Sudden Stoppage Inspection. Sudden stoppage is a very rapid and
complete stoppage of the engine. It can be
caused by engine seizure or by one or more of
the propeller blades striking an object in such a
way that rpm goes to zero in less than one
complete revolution of the propeller. Sudden
stoppage can cause internal damage to constant-speed propellers; reduction drive; gear
train damage in the accessory section; crankshaft misalignment; or damage to accessories
such as magnetos, generators, vacuum pumps,
and tach generators.
(1) Every engine that suffers a sudden
stoppage must be inspected in accordance with
the manufacturer’s maintenance instructions
before being returned to service.
(2) If the engine manufacturer does not
provide the required information, then the engine case must be opened and every major
component part must be inspected using visual
and/or nondestructive inspection (NDI) procedures as applicable.
(3) The sudden-stoppage inspections
include: checking for cowling, spinner, and
airframe cracks and hidden damage; and
alignment of the engine mount to the airframe,
the mounting hardware, isolation mounts, and
bushings. The aircraft’s firewall must also be
checked for distortion, cracks, and elongated
bolt holes. The damaged propeller must be
sent to an FAA-certificated repair station for
complete NDI and repair.
(4) Engine accessories such as: magnetos, starters, fuel pumps, turbochargers, alternators, or generators must be inspected in accordance with the manufacturer’s maintenance
manual on sudden stoppage or overhaul procedures to determine the product’s airworthiness.
c. Reciprocating Engine (Direct Drive).
Preliminary inspection before tear down.
(1) Remove the engine cowling and examine the engine for visible external damage
and audible internal damage.
(2) Rotate the propeller shaft to determine any evidence of abnormal grinding or
rubbing sounds.
(3) With the propeller removed, inspect
the crankshaft flange or splines for signs of
twisting, cracks, or other deformation. Remove the thrust-bearing nut and seal and thoroughly inspect the threaded area of the shaft
for evidence of cracks.
(4) Rotate the shaft slowly in 90-degree
increments while using a dial indicator or an
equivalent instrument to check the concentricity of the shaft.
(5) Remove the oil sump drain plug and
check for metal chips and foreign material.
(6) Remove the oil screens and inspect
for metal particles and contamination.
(7) Visually inspect engine case exterior
for signs of oil leaks and cracks. Give
particular attention to the propeller thrustbearing area of the nose case section.
(8) Inspect cylinders and cylinder holddown area for cracks and oil leaks. Thoroughly investigate any indication of cracks, oil
leaks, or other damage.
d. Internal Inspection Requirements.
(1) On engines equipped with crankshaft vibration dampers, remove and inspect
the cylinders, and inspect the crankshaft dampers in accordance with the engine manufacturer’s inspection and overhaul manual. When
engine design permits, remove the damper
pins, and examine the pins and damper liners
for signs of nicks or brinelling.
(2) After removing the engine-driven
accessories, remove the accessory drive case
and examine the accessory and supercharger
drive gear train, couplings, and drive case for
evidence of damage.
(a) Check for cracks in the case in
the area of accessory mount pads and gear
shaft bosses.
(b) Check the gear train for signs of
cracked, broken, or brinelled teeth.
(c) Check the accessory drive shaft
couplings for twisted splines, misalignment,
and run-out.
(d) Check connecting rods for cracks
and straightness.
e. Reciprocating Engine (Gear-Drive).
Inspect the engine, propeller, (refer to section 4
on propeller inspection), and components as
described in the preceding paragraphs.
(1) Remove the propeller reduction gear
housing and inspect for:
(a) Loose, sheared, or spalled cap
screws or bolts.
(b) Cracks in the case.
(2) Disassemble the gear train and inspect the propeller shaft, reduction gears and
accessory drive gears for nicks, cracks, or
spalling.
f. Engine-Mount Inspection.
(1) Examine the engine flex mounts
when applicable, for looseness of engine to
mount, distortion, or signs of wear.
(2) Inspect the engine-mount structure
for bent, cracked, or buckled tubes.
(3) Check the adjacent airframe structure firewall for cracks, distortion, or wrinkles.
(4) Remove engine-mount bolts and
mount hold-down bolts and replace.
g. Exhaust-driven Supercharger
(Turbo) Inspection. Sudden stoppage of the
powerplant can cause the heat in turbine parts
to heat-soak the turbine seals and bearings.
This excessive heat causes carbon to develop
in the seal area and varnish to form on the turbine bearings and journals.
(1) Inspect all air ducts and connections
for air leaks, warpage, or cracks.
(2) Remove compressor housing and
check the turbine wheel for rubbing or binding,
and coke or varnish buildup.
NOTE: Turbine turbo supercharger
disk seal rubbing is not unusual and
may be a normal condition. Consult
the engine manufacturer’s inspection
procedures and table of limits.
h. Accessory and Drive Inspection.
Check the drive shaft of each accessory, i.e.,
magnetos, generators, external superchargers,
and pumps for evidence of damage.
