AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 5: INSPECTION OF PROPELLERS

8-93. METAL PROPELLERS AND
BLADES. These propellers and blades are
generally susceptible to fatigue failure resulting from the concentration of stresses at the
bottoms of sharp nicks, cuts, and scratches. It
is necessary, therefore, to frequently and carefully inspect them for such injuries. Propeller
manufacturers publish SB’s and instructions
which prescribe the manner in which these inspections are to be accomplished. Additional
information is also available in AC 20-37D,
Aircraft Metal Propeller Maintenance.
a. Steel Blade Inspection. The inspection
of steel blades may be accomplished by either
visual, fluorescent penetrant (see chapter 5), or
magnetic particle inspection. The visual inspection is easier if the steel blades are covered
with engine oil or rust-preventive compound.
The full length of the leading edge, especially
near the tip, the full length of the trailing edge,
the grooves and shoulders on the shank, and all
dents and scars should be examined with a
magnifying glass to decide whether defects are
scratches or cracks.
b. Aluminum Propellers and Blades.
Carefully inspect aluminum propellers and
blades for cracks and other flaws. A transverse crack or flaw of any size is cause for rejection. Multiple deep nicks and gouges on the
leading edge and face of the blade is cause for
rejection. Use dye penetrant or fluorescent dye
penetrant to confirm suspected cracks found in
the propeller. Refer any unusual condition or
appearance revealed by these inspections to the
manufacturer.
c. Limitations.
(1) Corrosion may be present on propeller blades in varying amounts. Before performing any inspection process, maintenance
personnel must examine the specific type and
extent of the corrosion. (See chapter 6, and/or
refer to AC 43-4A, Corrosion Control For Aircraft.)
(2) Corrosion, other than small areas
(6 square inches or less) of light surface type
corrosion, may require propeller removal and
reconditioning by a qualified propeller repair
facility. When intergranular corrosion is present, the repair can be properly accomplished
only by an appropriately certificated propeller
repair facility. Corrosion pitting under propeller blade decals should be removed as described in the propeller manufacturer’s SB’s
and applicable airworthiness directives (AD).
(3) Unauthorized straightening of blade,
following a ground strike or other damage, can
create conditions that lead to immediate blade
failure. These unapproved major repairs may
sometimes be detected by careful inspection of
the leading edges and the flat face portion of
the blade. Any deviation of the flat portion,
such as bows or kinks, may indicate
unauthorized straightening of the blade.
Sighting along the leading edge of a propeller
blade for any signs of bending can provide
evidence of unapproved blade straightening.
Blades should be examined for any discoloration that would indicate unauthorized heating.
Blades that have been heated for any repair
must be rejected, since only cold straightening
is authorized. All blades showing evidence of
unapproved repairs should be rejected. When
bent propellers are shipped to an approved repair facility for inspection and repair, the propeller should never be straightened by field
service personnel to facilitate shipping, because this procedure can conceal damage.
Propeller tip damage will sometimes lead
maintenance personnel to consider removing
damaged material from the blade tips. However, propellers are often manufactured with a
particular diameter to minimize vibration.
Unless the TCDS and both the engine and propeller manufacturers specifically permit shortening of the blades on a particular propeller,
any shortening of the blades would probably
create an unairworthy condition. When conditions warrant, inspect the blade tips for evidence of shortening and, if necessary, measure
the propeller diameter to determine if it has
been changed by an unauthorized repair.
