AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 3: EXHAUST SYSTEMS

8-49. INSPECTION. Inspect exhaust systems frequently to ascertain complete system
integrity.
CAUTION: Marking of exhaust system parts. Never use lead pencils,
carbon based pencils, etc., to mark
exhaust system parts. Carbon deposited by those tools will cause cracks
from heat concentration and carbonization of the metal. If exhaust system
parts must be marked, use chalk,
Prussian blue, India ink, or a grease
pencil that is carbon-free.
a. Before any cleaning operation, remove the cowling as required to expose the
complete exhaust system. Examine cowling
and nacelle areas adjacent to exhaust system
components for telltale signs of exhaust gas
soot indicating possible leakage points. Check
to make sure no portion of the exhaust system
is being chafed by cowling, engine control cables, or other components. The exhaust system often operates at red-hot temperatures of
°F
1,000 or more; therefore, parts such as ignition leads, hoses, fuel lines, and flexible air
ducts, should be protected from radiation and
convection heating by heat shields or adequate
clearance.
b. Remove or loosen all exhaust shields,
carburetor and cabin heater muffs, shrouds,
heat blankets, etc., required to permit inspection of the complete system.
c. Perform necessary cleaning operations and inspect all external surfaces of the
exhaust system for cracks, dents, and missing
parts. Pay particular attention to welds,
clamps, supports and support attachment lugs,
bracing, slip joints, stack flanges, gaskets,
flexible couplings, and etc. (See figures 8-22
and 8-23.) Examine the heel of each bend, areas adjacent to welds, any dented areas, and
low spots in the system for thinning and pitting
due to internal erosion by combustion products
or accumulated moisture. An ice pick (or
similar pointed instrument) is useful in probing
suspected areas. Disassemble the system as
necessary to inspect internal baffles or diffusers.
d. Should a component be inaccessible
for a thorough visual inspection or hidden by
non-removable parts, remove the component
and check for possible leaks by plugging its
openings, applying approximately 2 psi internal pressure, and submerging it in water. Any
leaks will cause bubbles that can be readily
detected. Dry thoroughly before reinstallation.
