AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 1: ENGINES

8-15. SPARK PLUGS. The spark plug provides the high-voltage electrical spark to ignite
the fuel/air mixture in the cylinder. The types
of spark plugs used in different engines will
vary with regard to heat range, reach, thread
size, and other characteristics required by the
particular installation.
a. Heat Range. The heat range of a spark
plug is the principal factor governing aircraft
performance under various service conditions.
The term “heat range” refers to the
classification of spark plugs according to their
ability to transfer heat from the firing end of
the spark plug to the cylinder head.
(1) Spark plugs have been classified as
“hot,” “normal,” and “cold.” However, these
terms may be misleading because the heat
range varies through many degrees of temperature from extremely hot to extremely cold.
Thus the words “hot,” “cold,” and “normal” do
not necessarily tell the whole story.
(2) Since the insulator is designed to be
the hottest part of the spark plug, its temperature can be related to the pre-ignition and
fouling regions as shown in figure 8-2. Preignition is likely to occur if surface areas in the
combustion chamber exceed critical limits or if
the spark plug core nose temperature exceeds
°F °C).
1,630 (888 However, fouling or shortcircuiting of the plug due to carbon deposits is
likely to occur if the insulator tip temperature
°F °C).
drops below approximately 800 (427
Since spark plugs must operate between fairly
well-defined temperature limits, they must be
supplied in various heat ranges to meet the requirements of different engines under a variety
of operating conditions.
[FIG 8-2] Chart of spark plug temperature ranges.
(3) From the engineering standpoint,
each individual plug must be designed to offer
the widest possible operating range. This
means that a given type of spark plug should
operate as hot as possible at low speeds and
light loads and as cool as possible under
cruising and takeoff power. Plug performance,
therefore, depends on the operating temperature of the insulator nose, with the most desirable temperature range falling between
°F °F °C °C).
1,000 and 1,250 (538 and 677
(4) Fundamentally, an engine which
runs hot requires a relatively cold spark plug,
whereas an engine which runs cool requires a
relatively hot spark plug. If a hot spark plug is
installed in an engine which runs hot, the spark
plug tip will be overheated and cause preignition. If a cold spark plug is installed in an
engine which runs cool, the tip of the spark
plug will collect unburned carbon, causing
fouling of the plug. The principal factors governing the heat range of aircraft spark plugs
are:
(a) the distance between the copper
sleeve around the insulator and the insulator
tip;
(b) the thermal conductivity of the
insulating material;
(c) the thermal conductivity of the
electrode;
(d) the rate of heat transfer between
the electrode and the insulator;
(e) the shape of the insulator tip;
(f) the distance between the insulator
tip and the shell; and
(g) the type of outside gasket used.
(5) “Hot” plugs have a long insulator
nose; thereby, creating a long heat transfer
path, whereas “cold” plugs have a relatively
short insulator to provide a rapid transfer of
heat to the cylinder head. (See figure 8-3.)
[FIG 8-3] Hot and cold spark plugs.
b. Reach. The spark plug reach (see figure 8-4) is the threaded portion which is inserted into the spark plug bushing of the cylinder. A plug with the proper reach will ensure
that the electrode end inside the cylinder is in
the best position to achieve ignition. Spark
plug seizure or improper combustion within
the cylinder will probably occur if a plug with
the wrong reach is used. Shell threads of spark
plugs are classified as 14- or 18-mm spark
plug diameter, long reach or short reach, thus:
Diameter Long reach Short reach
14 mm 1/2 in (12.7 mm) 3/8 in (9.53 mm)
18 mm 13/16 in. (20.64 mm) 1/2 in (12.7 mm)
[FIG 8-4] Spark plug reach.
c. Installation Procedures. When installing spark plugs, observe the following
procedure.
(1) Visually inspect the plug for cleanliness and condition of the threads, ceramic,
and electrodes.
NOTE: Never install a spark plug
which has been dropped and always
use new gaskets every time you install
a spark plug.
(2) Check the plug for the proper gap
setting, using a round wire feeler gauge as
shown in figure 8-5. In the case of used plugs,
procedures for cleaning and regapping are usually contained in the various manufacturers’
manuals.
[FIG 8-5] Method of checking spark plug gap.
(3) Check the plug and cylinder bushing
to ascertain that only one gasket is used per
spark plug. When a thermocouple-type gasket
is used, no other gasket is required.
(4) Apply anti-seize compound sparingly to the shell threads, but do not allow the
compound to contact the electrodes since the
material is conductive and will short out the
plug. If desired, the use of anti-seize compound may be eliminated on engines equipped
with stainless steel spark plug bushings or
inserts.
(5) Screw the plug into the cylinder
head as far as possible by hand. If the plug
will not turn easily to within two or three
threads of the gasket, it may be necessary to
clean the threads.
NOTE: Cleaning inserts with a tap is
not recommended as permanent damage to the insert may result.
(6) Seat the proper socket securely on
the spark plug and tighten to the torque limit
specified by the engine manufacturer before
proceeding to the next plug.
CAUTION: A loose spark plug will
not transfer heat properly, and during
engine operation, may overheat to the
point the nose ceramic will become a
“hot spot” and cause pre-ignition.
However, avoid over-tightening as
damage to the plug and bushing may
result.
(7) Connect the ignition lead after wiping clean with a dry, lint-free cloth. Insert the
terminal assembly into the spark plug in a
straight line. (Care should be taken as improper techniques can damage the terminal
sleeves.) Screw the connector nut into place
until finger tight, then tighten an additional
one quarter turn while holding the elbow in the
proper position.
(8) Perform an engine run-up after installing a new set of spark plugs. When the
engine has reached normal operating temperatures, check the magnetos and spark plugs in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
