AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 1: ENGINES

8-16. OPERATIONAL PROBLEMS.
Whenever problems develop during engine
operation, which appear to be caused by the
ignition system, it is recommended that the
spark plugs and ignition harnesses be checked
first before working on the magnetos. The
following are the more common spark plug
malfunctions and are relatively easy to identify.
a. Fouling.
(1) Carbon fouling (see figure 8-6) is
identified by the dull black, sooty deposits on
the electrode end of the plug. Although the
primary causes are excessive ground idling and
rich idle mixtures, a cold heat range may also
be a contributing factor.
(2) Lead fouling is characterized by
hard, dark, cinder-like globules which gradually fill up the electrode cavity and short out
the plug. (See figure 8-6a.) The primary cause
for this condition is poor fuel vaporization
combined with a high tetraethyl-lead content
fuel. A cold heat range may also contribute to
this condition.
(3) Oil fouling is identified by a wet,
black carbon deposit over the entire firing end
of the plug as shown in figure 8-6b. This condition is fairly common on the lower plugs in
horizontally-opposed engines, and both plugs
in the lower cylinders of radial engines. Oil
fouling is normally caused by oil drainage past
the piston rings after shutdown. However,
when both spark plugs removed from the same
cylinder are badly fouled with oil and carbon,
some form of engine damage should be suspected, and the cylinder more closely inspected. Mild forms of oil fouling can usually
be cleared up by slowly increasing power,
while running the engine until the deposits are
burned off and the misfiring stops.
[FIG 8-6] Typical carbon-fouled spark plug.
b. Fused Electrodes. There are many different types of malfunctions which result in
fused spark plug electrodes; however, most are
associated with pre-ignition either as the cause
or the effect. For this reason, any time a spark
plug is found with the following defects, further investigation of the cylinder and piston
should be conducted.
(1) Occasionally, the ceramic nose core
will crack, break away, and remain trapped behind the ground electrode. This piece of insulation material will then buildup heat to the
point it will ignite the fuel/air mixture prematurely. The high temperatures and pressures
encountered during this condition can cause
damage to the cylinder and piston and ultimately lead to fusing and shorting out of the
plug. (See figure 8-6c.)
FIGURE 8-6a. Typical lead-fouled spark plug.
(2) Corrosive gases formed by combustion and the high voltage spark have eroded the
electrodes. Spark plugs in this condition require more voltage to fire—often more than
the ignition system can produce. (See figure 8-6d.)
c. Bridged Electrodes. Occasionally, free
combustion chamber particles will settle on the
electrodes of a spark plug and gradually bridge
the electrode gap, resulting in a shorted plug.
Small particles may be dislodged by slowly
cycling the engine as described for the oilfouled condition; however, the only remedy for
more advanced cases is removal and replacement of the spark plug. This condition is
shown in figure 8-6e.
FIGURE 8-6b. Typical oil-fouled spark plug.
d. Metal Deposits. Whenever metal spray
is found on the electrodes of a spark plug, it is
an indication that a failure of some part of the
engine is in progress. The location of the cylinder in which the spray is found is important
in diagnosing the problem, as various types of
failures will cause the metal spray to appear
differently. For example, if the metal spray is
located evenly in every cylinder, the problem
will be in the induction system, such as an impeller failure. If the metal spray is found only
on the spark plugs in one cylinder, the problem
is isolated to that cylinder and will generally
be a piston failure.
In view of the secondary damage which occurs
whenever an engine part fails, any preliminary
indication such as metal spray should be thoroughly investigated to establish and correct the
cause.
FIGURE 8-6c. Typical spark plug with cracked
core nose.
e. Flashover. It is important that spark
plug terminal contact springs and moisture
seals be checked regularly for condition and
cleanliness to prevent “flashover” in the connector well. Foreign matter or moisture in the
terminal connector well can reduce the insulation value of the connector to the point the ignition system voltages at higher power settings
may flash over the connector well surface to
ground and cause the plug to misfire. If
moisture is the cause, hard starting can also result. The cutaway spark plug shown in figure 8-7 illustrates this malfunction. Any spark
plug found with a dirty connector well may
have this condition, and should be reconditioned before reuse.
FIGURE 8-6d. Typical worn out spark plug.
