AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 4: REPAIR OF METAL PROPELLERS

8-73. ALUMINUM PROPELLER REPAIRS. Aluminum-alloy propellers and
blades with dents, cuts, scars, scratches, nicks,
leading-edge pitting, etc., may be repaired,
provided the removal or treatment does not
materially affect the strength, weight, or performance of the blade. Remove these damages
or otherwise treat as explained below, unless it
is contrary to the manufacturer’s instructions
or recommendations. More than one injury is
not sufficient cause alone for rejection of a
blade. A reasonable number of repairs per
blade may be made and not necessarily result
in a dangerous condition, unless their location
with respect to each other is such to form a
continuous line of repairs that would materially weaken the blade. Suitable sandpaper or
fine-cut files may be used for removing the
necessary amount of metal. In each case, the
area involved will be smoothly finished with
#00 sandpaper or crocus cloth, and each blade
from which any appreciable amount of metal
has been removed will be properly balanced
before it is used. Etch all repairs. To avoid
removal of an excessive amount of metal, local
etching should be accomplished at intervals
during the process of removing suspected
scratches. Upon completion of the repair,
carefully inspect the entire blade by etching or
anodizing. Remove all effects of the etching
process with fine emery paper. Blades identified by the manufacturer as being cold-worked
(shot-blasted or cold-rolled) may require
peening after repair. Accomplish repair and
peening operations on this type of blade in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
However, it is not permissible in any case to
peen down the edges of any injury wherein the
operation will lap metal over the injury.
a. Flaws in Edges. Round out nicks,
scars, cuts, etc., occurring on the leading edge
of aluminum-alloy blades as shown in figure 8-24 (view B). Blades that have the leading edges pitted from normal wear in service
may be reworked by removing sufficient material to eliminate the pitting. In this case, remove the metal by starting a sufficient distance
from the edge, as shown in figure 8-25, and
working forward over the edge in such a way
that the contour will remain substantially the
same, avoiding abrupt changes in contour.
Trailing edges of blades may be treated in substantially the same manner. On the thrust and
camber face of blades, remove the metal
around any dents, cuts, scars, scratches, nicks,
and pits to form shallow saucer-shaped depressions as shown in figure 8-24 (view C). Exercise care to remove the deepest point of the
injury and also remove any raised metal
around the edges of the injury as shown in figure 8-24 (view A). When repairing blades,
figures 8-26 and 8-27 show the maximum reduction in width and thickness that is allowable below the minimum dimensions required
by the blade drawing and blade manufacturing
specification. Beyond the 90
[FIG 8-24] Method of repairing surface scratches, nicks, etc.,
[FIG 8-25] Correct and incorrect method of reworking leading
on aluminum-alloy propellers.
edge of aluminum-alloy propellers.
90 percent blade radius point, the blade width
and thickness may be modified as per the
manufacturer’s instructions.
b. Shortening Blades. Shortening propeller blades is a major repair. When the removal or treatment of defects on the tip necessitates shortening a blade, shorten each blade
used with it and keep such sets of blades together. (See figure 8-26 for acceptable methods.) Mark the shortened blades to correspond
with the manufacturer’s system of model designation to indicate propeller diameter. In
making the repair, it is not permissible to reduce the propeller diameter below the minimum diameter limit shown on the pertinent
specification or type certificate data sheet.
c. Straighten Propeller Blades. Never
straighten a damaged propeller. Even partial
[FIG 8-26] Method of repairing damaged tip of aluminum-alloy
straightening of blades to permit shipment to a
certificated propeller repair facility may result
in hidden damage not being detected and an
unairworthy propeller being returned to service.
