AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 1: ENGINES

8-14. COMPRESSION TESTING OF
AIRCRAFT ENGINE CYLINDERS. A test
to determine the internal condition of the combustion chamber cylinder assembly by ascertaining if any appreciable internal leakage is
occurring is compression testing of aircraft engine cylinders. If a cylinder has less than a
60/80 reading on the differential test gauges on
a hot engine, and procedures in paragraphs 8-15b(5)(i) and (j) fail to raise the compression reading, the cylinder must be removed
and inspected. To determine the cylinder’s
problem area, have someone hold the propeller
at the weak cylinder’s top dead center and with
compressed air still being applied, listen. If air
is heard coming out of the exhaust pipe, the
cylinder’s exhaust-valve is not seating properly. If air is heard leaking out of the air
cleaner/carburetor heat box, the intake valve is
leaking. With the oil dipstick removed, and air
is rushing out, the piston rings are defective.
Remove and repair/overhaul the defective
cylinder.
a. Differential Compression Test. The
most common type of compression tester currently in use is the differential pressure-type
tester. It provides a cross-reference to validate
the readings obtained and tends to assure that
the cylinder is defective before it is removed.
Before beginning a compression test, consider
the following points:
(1) When the spark plugs are removed
from the engine, identify them to coincide with
the cylinder and location from which they were
removed. Close examination of the plugs will
reveal the actual operating conditions and aid
in diagnosing problems within each individual
cylinder.
(2) The operating and maintenance records of the engine should be reviewed. Records of previous compression tests are of assistance in determining progressive wear conditions and help to establish the necessary
maintenance corrective actions.
b. Differential Pressure Compression
Test. The differential pressure tester is designed to check the compression of aircraft engines by measuring the leakage through the
cylinders caused by worn or damaged components. The operation of the compression tester
is based on the principle that, for any given airflow through a fixed orifice, a constant pressure drop across that orifice will result. The
restrictor orifice dimensions in the differential
pressure tester should be sized for the particular engine as follows:
(1) For an engine cylinder having less
than a 5.00-inch bore; 0.040-inch orifice diameter; .250 inch long; and a 60-degree approach angle.
(2) For an engine cylinder with 5.00
inch bore and over: 0.060 inch orifice diameter, .250 inch long, 60 degree approach angle.
(3) A typical schematic diagram of the
differential pressure tester is shown in
figure 8-1.
[FIG 8-1] Schematic of differential pressure compression tester.
(4) As the regulated air pressure is applied to one side of the restrictor orifice with
the air valve closed, there will be no leakage
on the other side of the orifice and both pressure gauges will read the same. However,
when the air valve is opened and leakage
through the cylinder increases, the cylinder
pressure gauge will record a proportionally
lower reading.
(5) While performing the check the
following procedures are listed to outline the
principles involved, and are intended to supplement the manufacturer’s instructions for the
particular tester being used.
(a) Perform the compression test as
soon as possible after the engine is shut down
to ensure that the piston rings, cylinder walls,
and other engine parts are well-lubricated.
(b) Remove the most accessible
spark plug from each cylinder.
(c) With the air valve closed, apply
an external source of clean air (approximately
100 to 120 psi) to the tester.
(d) Install an adapter in the spark
plug bushing and connect the compression
tester to the cylinder.
(e) Adjust the pressure regulator to
obtain a reading of 20 psi on the regulator
pressure gauge. At this time, the cylinder
pressure gauge should also register 20 psi.
(f) Turn the crankshaft, by hand, in
the direction of rotation until the piston (in the
cylinder being checked) is coming up on its
compression stroke. Slowly open the air valve
and pressurize the cylinder to 80 psi.
CAUTION: Care must be exercised
in opening the air valve since sufficient air pressure will have built up in
the cylinder to cause it to rapidly rotate the propeller if the piston is not at
top dead center (TDC).
(g) Continue rotating the engine
against this pressure until the piston reaches
TDC. Reaching TDC is indicated by a flat
spot or sudden decrease in force required to
turn the crankshaft. If the crankshaft is rotated
too far, back up at least one-half revolution
and start over again to eliminate the effect of
backlash in the valve operating mechanism and
to keep piston rings seated on the lower ring
lands.
(h) Open the air valve completely.
Check the regulated pressure and readjust, if
necessary, to read 80 psi.
(i) Observe the pressure indication of
the cylinder pressure gauge. The difference
between this pressure and the pressure shown
by the regulator pressure gauge is the amount
of leakage through the cylinder. A loss in excess of 25 percent of the input air pressure is
cause to suspect the cylinder of being defective; however, recheck the readings after operating the engine for at least 3 minutes to allow
for sealing of the rings with oil.
(j) If leakage is still occurring after a
recheck, it may be possible to correct a low
reading. This is accomplished by placing a fiber drift on the rocker arm directly over the
valve stem and tapping the drift several times
with a hammer to dislodge any foreign material between the valve face and seat.
NOTE: When correcting a low reading in this manner, rotate the propeller so the piston will not be at TDC.
This is necessary to prevent the valve
from striking the top of the piston in
some engines. Rotate the engine before rechecking compression to reseat
the valves in the normal manner.
