AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 8: ENGINES, FUEL, EXHAUST, AND PROPELLERS  Section 1: ENGINES

8-19. MAGNETO INSPECTION. Whenever ignition problems develop and it is determined that the magneto is the cause of the difficulty, the following are a few simple inspection procedures which may locate the malfunction quickly. However, conduct any internal inspection or repair of a magneto in accordance with the manufacturer’s maintenance
and overhaul manuals.
a. Inspect the distributor block contact
springs. If broken or corroded, replace.
b. Inspect the felt oil washer, if applicable. It should be saturated with oil. If it is dry,
check for a worn bushing.
c. Inspect the distributor block for
cracks or a burned area. The wax coating on
the block should not be removed. Do not use
any solvents for cleaning.
[FIG 8-8] Typical method of clamping leads.
d. Look for excess oil in the breaker
compartment. If oil is present, it may indicate
a bad oil seal or bushing at the drive end. This
condition could require complete overhaul, as
too much oil may foul and cause excessive
burning of the contact points.
e. Look for frayed insulation on the
leads in the breaker compartment of the magneto. See that all terminals are secure. Be sure
that wires are properly positioned.
f. Inspect the capacitor visually for general condition, and check the mounting bracket
for cracks or looseness. If possible, check the
capacitor for leakage, capacity, and series resistance.
g. Examine the points for excessive wear
or burning. Discard points which have deep
pits or excessively burned areas. Desired
contact surfaces have a dull gray, sandblasted
(almost rough) or frosted appearance over the
area where electrical contact is made. Figure 8-9 shows how the normal contact point
will look when surfaces are separated for inspection. Minor irregularities or roughness of
point surfaces are not harmful (see figure 8-10), neither are small pits or mounds, if
not too pronounced. If there is a possibility of
the pit becoming deep enough to penetrate the
pad (see figure 8-11), reject the contact assembly.
[FIG 8-9] Normal contact point.
[FIG 8-10] Point with minor irregularities.
h. Generally, no attempt should be
made to dress or stone contact point assemblies; however, if provided, procedures and
limits contained in the manufacturer’s manuals
may be followed.
[FIG 8-11] Point with well-defined mound.
CAUTION: When inspecting the contact points for condition, do not open
further than absolutely necessary.
Excess tension on the spring will
weaken it and adversely affect the
performance of the magneto.
i. Adjustment of magneto point gaps
must be correct for proper internal timing of a
magneto. See applicable manufacturer’s publications for internal timing procedures.
j. Check the breaker cam to assure
cleanness and smoothness. Check the cam
screw for tightness. If new points have been
installed, blot a little oil on the cam. In addition, check contact point assembly to ascertain
that the cam follower is securely fastened.
k. If the impulse coupling is accessible,
inspect for excessive wear on the contact edges
of the body and flyweights. In addition, check
the flyweights for looseness on the axles.
l. Further examination of the impulse
coupling body may disclose cracks caused by
exceedingly-tight flyweight axle rivets.
m. Check the magneto ventilators for
proper functioning and obstructions. If drilled
plugs are used, they should be in the lowest
vent hole of the magneto to serve as a drain for
condensation and oil.
