AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 1: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDING GEAR

9-5. INSPECTION OF RETRACTABLE
LANDING GEAR. Inspection of the retractable landing gear should include all applicable
items mentioned in the inspection for the fixed
gear. In addition, the actuating mechanisms
must be inspected for wear looseness in any
joint, trunnion, or bearing; leakage of fluid
from any hydraulic line or unit; and, smoothness of operation. The operational check is
performed by jacking the aircraft according to
the manufacturer’s instructions and then operating the gear retracting and extending system.
a. During the operational test, the
smoothness of operation, effectiveness of upand-down locks, operation of the warning
horn, operation of indicating systems, clearance of tires in wheel wells, and operation of
landing-gear doors should be checked. Improper adjustment of sequence valves may
cause doors to rub against gear structures or
wheels. The manufacturer’s checklist should
be followed to ensure that critical items are
checked. While the aircraft is still on jacks,
the gear can be tested for looseness of mounting points, play in torque links, condition of
the inner strut cylinder, play in wheel bearings,
and play in actuating linkages. Emergency
blow down gear bottles should be inspected for
damage and corrosion and weighed to see if
the bottle is still retaining the charge.
b. Mechanics should be aware that retread tires can be dimensionally bigger than a
“new” tire. While this does not pose a problem on fixed landing gear aircraft, it may present a serious problem when installed on retractable landing gear aircraft. It is strongly
recommended that if a retread tire is installed
on a retractable landing gear aircraft, a retraction test be performed. With the gear in the
up-and-lock position, the mechanic should
determine that if the tire expands due to high
ambient temperature, heat generated from taxi
and take-off, repeated landings, or heavy
braking, the tire will not expand to the point
that it becomes wedged in the wheel well.
c. The proper operation of the antiretraction system should be checked in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
Where safety switches are actuated by the
torque links, the actual time of switch closing
or opening can be checked by removing all air
from the strut and then collapsing the strut. In
every case, the adjustment should be such that
the gear control cannot be placed in the UP position or that the system cannot operate until
the shock strut is at the full extended position.
