AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 3: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

9-49. MAINTENANCE.
a. Oxygen Tanks, Cylinders, and HoldDown Brackets.
(1) Remove from service any cylinders
that show signs of abuse, dents, bulges, cracks,
distortion, damaged thread, or defects which
might render them unsafe. Typical examples
of oxygen cylinder damage are shown in figure 9-14.
(2) When replacing an oxygen cylinder,
be certain that the replacement cylinder is of
the same size and weight as the one removed.
[FIG 9-14] Oxygen cylinder damage.
NOTE: Cylinders having greater
weight or size will require strengthened cylinder mounting brackets and
a reevaluation to determine that the
larger or heavier cylinder will not interfere with adjacent systems, components, or structural members, and that
the strength of attaching structure is
adequate and any additional weight
will be computed into the aircraft’s
weight and balance report.
(3) Replace or repair any cylinder
mounting brackets that show signs of wear.
Visible cracks may be welded in accordance
[FIG 9-15] Cylinder brackets and clamps.
with manufacturer’s standards. Replace the
cylinder straps or clamps that show wear or
abuse. For typical mounting bracket cracks
and failure, see figure 9-15.
b. Lines and Fittings.
(1) Replace any oxygen line that is
chafed, rusted, corroded, dented, cracked, or
kinked.
(2) Clean oxygen system fittings
showing signs of rusting or corrosion in the
threaded area. To accomplish this, use a
cleaner recommended by manufacturers of
oxygen equipment. Replace lines and fittings
that cannot be cleaned.
(a) The high-pressure lines which are
located between the oxygen bottle (outside the
oxygen service filler) and the regulator are
normally fabricated from stainless steel or
thick-wall, seamless copper alloy tubing. The
fittings on high-pressure lines are normally silver brazed.
NOTE: Use silver alloys free of cadmium when silver brazing. The use of
silver brazing alloys, which contain
cadmium, will emit a poisonous gas
when heated to a molten state. This
gas is extremely hazardous to health if
inhaled.
(b) The low-pressure lines extend
from the pressure regulator to each passenger
and crew oxygen outlet. These lines are fabricated from seamless aluminum alloy, copper,
or flexible hose. Normally, flare- or flangetype connections are used.
CAUTION: Do not allow oil, grease,
flammable solvent, or other combustibles such as lint or dust to come in
contact with threads or any parts that
will be exposed to pressurized oxygen.
(c) It is advisable to purge the oxygen
system any time work has been accomplished
on any of the lines and fittings. Use dry nitrogen or dry air for purging the system. All open
lines should be capped immediately after
purging.
(d) When oxygen is being lost from a
system through leakage, a sequence of steps
may be necessary to locate the opening. Leakage may often be detected by listening for the
distinct hissing sound of escaping gas. If this
check proves negative, it will be necessary to
soap-test all lines and connections with a castile soap and water solution or specially compounded leak-test material. Make the solution
thick enough to adhere to the contours of the
fittings. At the completion of the leakage test,
remove all traces of the soap and water.
CAUTION: Do not attempt to tighten
any connections while the system is
charged.
c. Regulators, Valves, and Gauges. Line
maintenance of oxygen regulators, valves, and
gauges does not include major repair. These
components are precision made and their repair usually requires the attention of a repair
station or the manufacturer. Care must be
taken when reinstalling these components to
ascertain if the threaded area is free of nicks,
burrs, and contaminants that would prevent the
connections from sealing properly.
CAUTION: Do not use petroleum lubricants on these components.
d. Masks and Hoses.
(1) Troubleshooting. If a mask assembly is defective (leaks, does not allow breathing, or contains a defective microphone), it is
advisable to return the mask assembly to the
manufacturer or a repair station.
(2) Maintenance Practice and Cleaning.
(a) Clean and disinfect the mask assemblies after use, as appropriate.
NOTE: Use care to avoid damaging
the microphone assembly while
cleaning and sterilizing.
(b) Wash the mask with a mild soap
solution and rinse it with clear water.
(c) To sterilize, swab the mask thoroughly with a gauze or sponge soaked in a
water merthiolate solution. This solution
should contain 1/5-teaspoon of merthiolate
per 1 quart of water. Wipe the mask with a
clean cloth and air dry.
(d) Replace the hose if it shows evidence of deterioration.
(e) Hoses may be cleaned in the same
manner as the mask.
(f) Observe that each mask breathing
tube end is free of nicks, and that the tube end
will slip into the cabin oxygen receptacle with
ease and not leak.
