AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 3: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

9-46. MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT.
a. Parachutes. With reasonable care,
parachutes can remain in service indefinitely.
They should not be carelessly tossed about, left
in aircraft to become wet, or left where someone may tamper with them. They should not
be placed where they may fall on oily floors or
be subject to acid fumes from adjacent battery
chargers.
(1) When repacking is scheduled, to
comply with the 120-day requirement in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulation
(14 CFR) part 105 section 105.43 a careful inspection of the parachute shall be made by a
qualified parachute technician (rigger). If repairs or replacements of parts are necessary to
maintain the airworthiness of the parachute assembly, such work must be done by the original parachute manufacturer or by a qualified
parachute rigger, certificated in accordance
with 14 CFR, part 65.
(2) The lead seal should be inspected
periodically to ensure the thread has not been
broken. If broken, or broken and retied or
appears to have been tampered with, the parachute must be repacked by a properly certified
rigger.
b. Safety Belts shall be of an approved
type. All seat belts and restraint systems must
conform to standards established by the FAA.
These standards are contained in Technical
Standard Order TSO C22 for seat belts and
TSO C114 for restraint systems.
(1) Safety belts eligible for installation
in aircraft must be identified by the proper
TSO markings on the belt. Each safety belt
must be equipped with an approved metal to
metal latching device. Airworthy typecertificated safety belts currently in aircraft
may be removed for cleaning and reinstalled.
However, when a TSO safety belt is found
unairworthy, replacement with a new
TSO-approved belt or harness is required.
(2) The webbing of safety belts, even
when mildew-proofed, is subject to deterioration due to constant use, cleaning, and the effects of aging. Fraying of belts is an indication
of wear, and such belts are likely to be unairworthy because they can no longer hold the
minimum required tensile load.
(3) Safety belts shall be repaired in
accordance with specifications approved by the
responsible FAA ACO.
