AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 3: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

9-42. RAFT REPAIRS.
a. Repairs. The service life for flotation
equipment will be determined by condition
rather than age. Equipment passing tests and
inspections may remain in service indefinitely
since the inflation tests and material inspections will identify and condemn equipment
having more than minor installation defects.
However, the service life for life rafts operating under normal usage and environmental
conditions is anticipated by the manufacturers
to be 8 to 10 years, and it is appropriate to base
life raft’s parts replacement programs upon this
estimate. It is not considered advisable or economical to perform major repairs on life rafts.
b. Life Rafts. Life rafts with any of the
following conditions should be condemned
rather than repaired:
(1) Life rafts over 3-1/2 years of age
and requiring major repair or more than two
minor repairs.
(2) A rip or tear across an air retaining
seam.
(3) Rafts on which oil, grease, or any
other foreign substance has caused a deterioration of the rubberized fabric.
(4) Rafts on which a heavy mildew
condition has caused deterioration of the rubberized fabric.
(5) Rafts on which porous flotation
tubes allow diffusion of air. A porous area is
located by a soap test on the inflated raft.
Higher diffusion is indicated by the excessive
loss of pressure after a soap test has failed to
locate a specific area of injury on the raft.
(6) Rafts requiring internal repair or
opening of air retaining seams for repair.
(7) Rafts with an excessive number of
injuries that would not, in the judgment of
competent inspectors, justify repair.
c. Patches. Holes or abrasions which are
2 inches or less, in diameter (in air retaining
chambers) will be repaired by the application
of an outside patch. Holes exceeding 2 inches
in length or diameter, will require an inside
patch as well as an outside patch. Inside and
outside patches should be round or rectangular
and manufactured of fabric (specification
MIL-C-6819). Cement should conform to
Class 1 of specification MIL-C-5539. Patch as
follows:
(1) Outside patches.
(a) With a rubber solvent thoroughly
clean the area to be patched.
(b) From the material referenced,
fabricate a patch as shown in figure 9-13.
(c) When two fabric surfaces are to
be bonded, apply two coats of extra light cement, two coats of light cement, and three
coats of heavy cement to each surface. Rubbercoated tape and seam crossover patches with
protective backing do not require cement. Each
coat of cement should be thoroughly dry to the
touch before the next coat is applied. Start the
bonding of fabric surfaces while the last coat
of cement is slightly tacky. To ensure proper
adhesion when bonding two cemented surfaces, the areas to be bonded should remain
tacky during application. This is accomplished
by brushing the cemented area with a cloth
moistened with solvent.
NOTE: If difficulty in the drying of
heavy cement is encountered due to
atmospheric conditions, six additional
coats of light cement may be substituted for the three coats of heavy cement.
(d) After applying the patch, thoroughly roll it with a hand roller, rolling from
the center to the outer edge, to ensure that all
air pockets are removed and a firm bond is secured.
(e) Thoroughly dust with talc. Allow
to cure for 60 hours before performing leak
tests and storing.
(2) Inside Patches.
(a) Cut a rectangular patch as shown
in figure 9-13, allowing at least 1-1/2 inches to
extend beyond the edge of the injury in all directions.
(b) Mark the center line on the side
of the patch that is to be attached to the raft.
Mark cross lines on each end of the patch
1-1/2 inches from the ends. When the patch is
applied to the injury on the inside, the longitudinal edges of the injury will coincide with the
center line, and cross lines on the ends of the
patch will coincide with the ends of the injury.
(c) To ensure that the inside surface
of the raft is properly powdered in the area of
repair, pass a small handful of talc through the
opening in the raft and place it approximately
12 inches from the injury. This should be accomplished before the inside area is cemented,
exercising care to prevent distribution of the
talc prior to completion of the repair.
[FIG 9-13] Repair dimensions.
(d) Using cleaning solvent, cleanse
an area on the inside surface of the fabric
slightly larger than the patch to be applied. Ensure that the repaired area is thoroughly dry,
both inside and outside; apply two coats of
extra light cement, two coats of light cement,
and three coats of heavy cement (or six additional coats of light cement in lieu of the heavy
cement) to the cleansed area, allowing each
coat to dry thoroughly before applying successive coats.
NOTE: Since it is impossible for the
repairman to visually observe the cementing that is being accomplished on
the inside of the raft, exercise care to
ensure that each coat of cement completely covers the area to be repaired.
(e) The inside patch should be cemented simultaneously with the application of
cement to the inside of the raft. Apply the
same number of coats as directed in paragraph 9 42b(2)(d) to the side of the patch that
is applied to the injured fabric of the raft. Ensure that each coat is thoroughly dry before
applying the next coat.
(f) To aid in adhesion, prior to applying the patch, the inside area to be repaired
and cemented surface of the patch should be
cleaned with a cloth moistened with rubber
solvent. The cement will then become tacky.
(g) Apply the patch. Fold the patch
lengthwise in the shape of the letter “U” and
insert the patch between the torn edges of the
injury on the life rafts. Position the patch so
that the fabric at the end of the tear will coincide with a cross line and the center line on the
patch follows one edge of the torn fabric. Attach one edge of the torn fabric along the center line on the patch.
(h) Inspect the repair for wrinkles.
Working from the attached edge of the fabric
to the edge of the patch, remove the wrinkles
with a stitcher. Lay the opposite edge of the
torn fabric on the patch so that it butts the edge
of the torn fabric that has already been applied
to the patch. Remove the wrinkles. Thoroughly roll the patch with a 2 inch rubber
roller.
NOTE: The surface under the patch
should be as smooth as possible so that
the torn edge of the fabric may be attached to the patch instead of attempting to attach the patch to the
fabric.
(i) Scatter the handful of talc that was
placed inside the tube by grasping the sides of
the flotation tube and pulling them apart.
(j) Prepare and attach the outside
patch as outlined in “OUTSIDE PATCHES,”
sub-paragraphs 9-42b(1)(a)-(e).
(k) Allow to cure for at least
60 hours before performing leak tests and
storing.
(3) Seams and Tapes.
(a) Remove all old or dead cement
from the area that will require recementing.
Dampen the repair area with a solventmoistened cloth; then roll or rub off the old
cement.
(b) Apply cement to the surface as
outlined in “OUTSIDE PATCHES,” subparagraph 9-42b(1)(a)-(e).
(c) Roll thoroughly with a roller to
ensure that all air pockets are removed and a
firm bond is secured.
(d) Allow to dry and apply talc over
the seam as previously outlined.
(e) Allow to cure for at least 60 hours
before performing leak tests and storing.
