AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 1: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDING GEAR

9-7. LANDING GEAR COMPONENTS.
The following items are susceptible to service
difficulties and should be inspected.
a. Shock Absorbers. Inspect the entire
shock-strut for evidence of leaks, cracks, and
possible bottoming of the piston, as this condition causes overloading of landing-gear
components and contributes to fatigue cracks.
Check all bolts, bolt holes, pins, and bushings
for condition, lubrication, and proper torque
values. Grease fitting holes (pressure-type) are
especially vulnerable to cracks and crossthreading damage. Check all safety wire and
other locking devices, especially at the main
packing gland nuts.
(1) When assembling shock-struts, use
the correct type and number of new “O”-rings,
Chevron seals, and backup rings. Use only the
correct filler valve core assembly, and follow
the manufacturer’s instructions when servicing
with fluid and air. Either too much or too little
air or oil will affect aircraft handling characteristics during taxi, takeoff, and landing, and
can cause structural overloads.
(2) Shock cords and rubber discs deteriorate with age and exposure. When this type
of shock absorber is used, inspect for general
condition; i.e., cleanliness, stretching, fraying,
and broken strands. These components should
be kept free of petroleum products as they accelerate deterioration of the rubber.
b. Nose Gear Assembly. Inspection of
the steering mechanism should include torquelinks (scissors), torque-tubes, control rods and
rod-end bearings, shimmy dampers, cables,
and turning stops. In addition, check all nose
landing gear components, including mud
scrapers and slush deflectors, for damage.
(1) Towing of some aircraft with the
rudder locks installed, may cause damage to
the steering linkage and rudder control system.
Exceeding the steering or towing stop limits
should be followed by a close inspection of the
entire nose steering assembly. A broken
steering stop will allow turning beyond the design limit, transmitting excessive loads to
structures, and to the rudder control system. It
is recommended that the nose steering arc limits be painted on the steering collar or fuselage.
(2) Inspect shimmy dampers for leakage
around the piston shaft and at fluid line connections, and for abnormal wear or looseness
around the pivot points. Also check for proper
rigging, “bottoming” of the piston in the cylinder, and the condition of the external stops on
the steering collar.
c. Tail Wheels. Disassembly, cleaning,
and re-rigging of tail wheels are periodically
necessary. Inspect them for loose or broken
bolts, broken springs, lack of lubrication, and
general condition. Check steerable tail wheels
for proper steering action, steering-horn wear,
clearances, and for security and condition of
steering springs and cables.
d. Gear Doors. Inspect gear doors frequently for cracks, deformation, proper rigging, and general condition. Gear door hinges
are especially susceptible to progressive
cracking, which can ultimately result in complete failure, allowing the door to move and
cause possible jamming of the gear. This condition could also result in the loss of the door
during flight. In addition, check for proper
safetying of the hinge pins and for distorted,
sheared, loose, or cracked hinge rivets. Inspect
the wheel wells for improper location or routing of components and related tubing or wiring. This could interfere with the travel of the
gear door actuating mechanisms.
e. Wheels. Inspect the wheels periodically for cracks, corrosion, dents, distortion,
and faulty bearings in accordance with the
manufacturer’s service information. In splittype wheels, recondition bolt holes which have
become elongated due to some play in the
through-bolt, by the use of inserts or other
FAA-approved means. Pay particular attention
to the condition of the through-bolts and nuts.
Carefully inspect the wheels used with tubeless
tires for damage to the wheel flange and for
proper sealing of the valve. The sealing ring
used between the wheel halves should be free
of damage and deformation. When bolting
wheel halves together, tighten the nuts to the
proper torque value. Periodically accomplish
an inspection to ensure the nuts are tight and
that there is no movement between the two
halves of the wheel. Maintain grease retaining
felts in the wheel assembly in a soft, absorbent
condition. If any have become hardened, wash
them with a petroleum-base cleaning agent; if
this fails to soften them, they should be replaced.
(1) Corrosion of wheels. Remove all
corrosion from the wheel half, and inspect it to
ensure that the wheel halves are serviceable.
Apply corrosion prevention treatments as applicable. Prime with a zinc chromate primer or
equivalent, and apply at least two finish coats.
(2) Dented or distorted wheels. Replace wheels which wobble excessively due to
deformation resulting from a severe side-load
impact. In questionable cases, consult the local representative of the FAA concerning the
airworthiness of the wheels. Minor dents do
not affect the serviceability of a wheel.
(3) Wheel bearings. When inspecting
wheel bearings for condition, replace damaged
or excessively worn parts. Maintain bearings
and races as matched sets. Pack bearings only
with the grease type called for in the manufacturer’s maintenance manual prior to their
installation. Avoid pre-loading the wheel
bearing when installing it on the aircraft by
tightening the axle nut just enough to prevent
wheel drag or side play.
f. Brakes. Disassemble and inspect the
brakes periodically and examine the parts for
wear, cracks, warpage, corrosion, elongated
holes, etc. Discolored brake disks are an indication of overheated brakes and should be replaced. If any of these or other faults are indicated, repair, recondition, or replace the affected parts in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
g. Hydraulic Brakes. For proper maintenance, periodically inspect the entire hydraulic
system from the reservoir to the brakes.
Maintain the fluid at the recommended level
with proper brake fluid. When air is present in
the brake system, bleed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Replace flexible
hydraulic hoses which have deteriorated due to
long periods of service and replace hydraulic
piston seals when there is evidence of leakage.
h. Micro-Switches. Inspect microswitches for security of attachment, cleanliness, general condition, and proper operation.
Check the associated wiring for chafing,
proper routing, and to determine that protective covers are installed on wiring terminals, if
required. Check the condition of the rubber
dust boots which protect the micro-switch
plungers from dirt and corrosion.
