AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 3: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

9-44. LIFE PRESERVER INSPECTION.
Life preservers should be inspected at
12-month intervals for cuts, tears, or other
damage to the rubberized material. Check the
mouth valves and tubing for leakage, corrosion, and deterioration. Remove the CO cyl2
inder and check the discharge mechanism by
operating the lever to ascertain that the pin operates freely. Check the gaskets and valve
cores of the cylinder container and the pull
cord for deterioration. If no defects are found,
inflate the preserver with air to a 2 psi pressure
and allow to stand for 12 hours. If the preserver still has adequate rigidity at the end of
that time, deflate and fit with CO cylinders
2
having weights not less than that indicated on
them by the manufacturer. All cylinders made
in accordance with joint Army/Navy Specification MIL-C-00601D are so stamped and
have a minimum permissible weight stamped
on them. The use of such CO cylinders is
2
recommended. Having fitted the preserver
with an adequately-charged cylinder, mark the
preserver to indicate the date of inspection and
patch it to the container. It is recommended
that the aforementioned procedure be repeated
every 12-month period, utilizing the CO car2
tridge for inflation. Carbon dioxide permeates
the rubberized fabric at a faster rate than air
and will indicate if the porosity of the material
is excessive. The following checks and inspections should be completed:
a. Check for abrasions, chafing, and
soiling across folded cell areas and around
metal parts. Condemn the life preserver when
unsuitable conditions are found.
b. Check for separation of cell fabric and
loose attachments along the edges of patches
and sealing tapes. Repair if practicable.
c. Check for deterioration in areas where
oil and grease are noted. Condemn deteriorated cells. If deterioration is not noted, clean
the areas with mild soap and water and rinse
with clear water.
d. Inspect the snaps and/or buckles to
ensure proper operation.
e. Inspect the instruction panel for readability.
f. Inspect all stitching for gaps, pulls, and
tears.
g. Visually inspect the cell containers for
snags, cuts, loose stitching, and oil and grease
spots. Repair or replace as necessary.
h. Inspect the hardware for rusted or
broken parts and cotter pins for damage. Ensure that pins are smooth and free of burrs.
i. Check the inflator discharge lever for
proper operation. Move the inflator discharge lever slowly through a normal cycle of
operation to ensure freedom of operation and
to make certain that the piercing pin has sufficient movement to discharge the CO cylinder.
2
The point of the pin should move past the surface of the gasket in the inflator. In the unoperated position, the end point should be
slightly below the gasket surface.
j. Check the installation of the inflator
stem gaskets and check the stem caps for
tightness. Ensure that the inflator is centered
on the stem.
k. Check rescue light. Inspect and test.
(1) Replace the battery if it shows any
signs of encrustation.
(2) Inspect for proper installation and
physical condition of the lamp, wire, and battery.
(3) Check the light assembly for proper
operation and water insulation and flotation.
(4) Pull the sealing plug (where applicable) from the battery. Let water flow
through the open ports. Make sure the battery
is activated and power is supplied to the light.
(5) Fill out the inspection record and
serviceable parts tag. Attach to the vest.
l. Deflate the life preserver and repack in
container and secure.
m. The accessories listed below will be
required for all life preservers:
(1) One Recognition Light: Remove
when returning to serviceable or reparable
storage. Remove for replacement of defective
light, repair, or salvage of preserver.
(2) One Recognition Light Battery:
Remove when returning to serviceable or reparable storage.
n. Record the inspection data on data
cards.
o. Life preserver inspected and found
sea worthy. Include the inspector’s signature.
p. Inspection record. Upon completion
of 12-month inspection and tests, each flotation cell will be marked to indicate the date the
inspection was accomplished. The inspection
stencil will consist of 1/8-inch letters and numerals and will be applied to the patches on
the cells (example: 4/3/97). To facilitate
determination of the next 12-month inspection
period, enter the date it is due in the blank beside the word inspect on the inspection data
card provided in the inspection data pocket on
the cell container. Repack, close, and seal the
container.
