AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 4: CABIN INTERIOR

9-61. CAR-3 AIRCRAFT INTERIOR.
The requirement for an interior of a CAR-3
aircraft that is used only in 14 CFR, part 91
operations, where smoking is not permitted, is
that the materials shall be flash-resistant.
(Reference CAR-3.388.)
a. For compartments in CAR-3 aircraft
where smoking is permitted, the wall and
ceiling linings, the covering of all
upholstering, floors, and furnishings shall be
flame-resistant. Such compartments should be
equipped with an adequate number of selfcontained ash trays. All other compartments
shall be placarded against smoking. (Refer to
CAR-3.388.)
(1) If fabric is bought in bulk to
refurbish the interior, seats, and ceiling liners
for a CAR-3 aircraft used in part 91
operations, a manufacturer’s statement,
declaring that the material meets the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or
similar national standard for either flash
resistance or flame resistance, would be
acceptable, but only for a CAR-3 aircraft
installation. (Refer to 14 CFR part 43,
section 43.13(a).) A manufacturer’s statement
is acceptable due to neither the Civil
Aeronautics Administration (CAA) nor the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) having
published an FAA fire standard for either flash
or flame resistance for interior materials for
CAR-3 aircraft. Since the FAA would accept
and recognize a national
standard, the mechanic would reference the
manufacturer’s statement and the national
standard that the material meets in the
aircraft’s maintenance records.
(2) If an annual inspection is performed
on a CAR3 aircraft with a new interior and
-
there is no mention of a manufacturer’s
statement that the fabric is flash or flame
resistant as applicable, the possibility exists
that the fabric is an unapproved part. The
mechanic should take the necessary steps to
ensure that the fabric meets or exceeds the
ASTM or national standards. (Refer to
14 CFR part 23, appendix F.)
(3) If an FAA-approved STC interior kit
is installed in a CAR-3 aircraft, and the
material and fabric in the kit are PMA or TSO
approved, the mechanic should include the
STC number in block 8 of FAA Form 337.
b. It is recommended that for all CAR-3
interiors to use only fabric and materials that
meets the more stringent requirements of
part 23, appendix F.
