AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 1: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDING GEAR

9-9. INSPECTION AND REPAIR OF
FLOATS AND SKIS. Inspection of floats
and skis involves examination for damage due
to corrosion, collision with other objects, hard
landings, and other conditions that may lead to
failure. Tubular structures for such gear may
be repaired as described in the section covering welded repairs of tubular structures.
a. Floats. To maintain the float in an airworthy condition, periodic and frequent inspections should be made because of the rapidity of corrosion on metal parts, particularly
when the aircraft is operated in salt water. Examine metal floats and all metal parts on
wooden or fiberglass floats for corrosion, and
take corrective action in accordance with the
procedures described in Chapter 6, Corrosion,
Inspection & Protection. Chapter 4, Metal
Structure, Welding, and Brazing, outlines
methods for repairing damage to metal floats
of aluminum and aluminum alloy structures.
Note: Blind rivets should not be used on
floats or amphibian hulls below the water
line.
In the case of wooden floats, make repairs in
accordance with general procedures outlined in
Chapter 1, Wood Structure. Repair fiberglass
floats in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.
(1) If small blisters are noticed on the
paint, either inside or outside the float, the
paint should be removed and the area examined. If corrosion is found, the area should be
cleaned thoroughly, and a coat of corrosioninhibiting material applied. If the corrosion
penetrates the metal to an appreciable depth,
replace the metal. Special attention should be
given to brace wire fittings and water ruddercontrol systems.
(2) If the hull or floats have retractable
landing gear, a retraction check should be performed along with the other recommendations
mentioned for retractable landing-gear systems. Sheet-metal floats should be repaired
using approved practices; however, the seams
between sections of sheet metal should be waterproofed with suitable fabric and sealing
compound. A float that has undergone hull repairs should be tested by filling it with water
and allowing it to stand for at least 24 hours to
see if any leaks develop.
b. Skis and Ski Installation. Skis should
be inspected for general condition of the skis,
cables, bungees, and fuselage attachments. If
retractable skis are used, checks in accordance
with the general practices for retractable gear
should be followed. Ski manufacturers usually
furnish acceptable repair procedures. It is advisable to examine ski installations frequently
to keep them maintained in airworthy condition. If shock cord is used to keep the ski runner in proper trim, periodically examine to ensure that the cord has enough elasticity to keep
the runner in its required attitude and the cord
is not becoming loose or badly frayed. Replace old or weak shock cords. When other
means of restraint are provided, examine for
excessive wear and binding, and replace or repair as required. Examine the points of cable
attachment, both on the ski and the aircraft
structure, for bent lugs due to excessive loads
that have been imposed while taxiing over
rugged terrain or by trying to break loose frozen skis. If skis that permit attachment to the
wheels and tires are used, maintain proper tire
pressure as under-inflated tires may push off
the wheels if appreciable side loads are developed in landing or taxiing.
c. Repair of Ski Runners. Repair limits
are found in the applicable manufacturer’s
manual. Fractured wooden ski runners usually
require replacement. If a split at the rear end
of the runner does not exceed 10 percent of the
ski length, it may be repaired by attaching one
or more wooden crosspieces across the top of
the runner using glue and bolts. Bent or torn
metal runners may be straightened if minor
bending has taken place and minor tears may
be repaired in accordance with procedures recommended in Chapter 4, Metal Structure,
Welding, and Brazing.
d. Ski Pedestals.
(1) Tubular Pedestals. Damaged pedestals made of steel tubing may be repaired by
using tube splices as shown in the chapter on
welding.
(2) Cast Pedestals. Consult a Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) representative
on the repair of cast pedestals.
