AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 1: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDING GEAR

9-10. TYPES OF LANDING GEAR
PROBLEMS. During inspection and before
removing any accumulated dirt, closely observe the area being inspected while the wingtips are gently rocked up and down. Excessive
motion between normally close-fitting landing
gear components may indicate wear, cracks, or
improper adjustment. If a crack exists, it will
generally be indicated by dirt or metallic particles which tend to outline the fault. Seepage
of rust inhibiting oils, used to coat internal surfaces of steel tubes, also assists in the early
detection of cracks. In addition, a sooty, oily
residue around bolts, rivets, and pins is a good
indication of looseness or wear.
[FIG 9-2] Typical bolt cracks.
a. Thoroughly clean and re-inspect the
landing gear to determine the extent of any
damage or wear. Some components may require removal and complete disassembly for
detailed inspection. Others may require a specific check using an inspection process such as
dye penetrant, magnetic particle, radiographic,
ultrasonic, or eddy current. The frequency,
degree of thoroughness, and selection of inspection methods are dependent upon the age,
use, and general condition of the landing gear.
b. Inspect the aircraft or landing gear
structure surrounding any visible damage to
ensure that no secondary damage remains undetected. Forces can be transmitted along the
affected member to remote areas where subsequent normal loads can cause failure at a later
date.
c. Prime locations for cracks on any
landing gear are bolts, bolt holes, pins, rivets,
and welds. The following are typical locations
where cracks may develop.
d. Most susceptible areas for bolts are at
the radius between the head and the shank, and
in the location where the threads join the
shank, as shown in figure 9-2.
e. Cracks primarily occur at the edge of
bolt holes on the surface and down inside the
bore. (See figures 9-3 and 9-4.)
[FIG 9-3] Typical cracks near bolt holes.
[FIG 9-4] Typical bolt hole cracks.
f. The usual types of failure in riveted
joints or seams are deformation of the rivet
heads and skin cracks originating at the rivets’
holes.
g. Cracks and subsequent failures of rod
ends usually begin at the thread end near the
bearing and adjacent to or under the jam nut.
(See figure 9-5.)
[FIG 9-5] Typical rod-end cracks.
h. Cracks develop primarily along the
edge of the weld adjacent to the base metal and
along the centerline of the bead.
i. Elongated holes are especially prevalent in taper-pin holes and bolt holes or at the
riveted joints of torque tubes and push-pull
rods. (See figure 9-6.)
[FIG 9-6] Typical torque tube bolt hole elongation.
j. Deformation is common in rods and
tubes and usually is noticeable as stretched,
bulged, or bent sections. Because deformations of this type are difficult to see, feel along
the tube for evidence of this discrepancy. Deformation of sheet-metal web sections, at
landing-gear component attachment points,
usually can be seen when the area is highlighted with oblique lighting.
