AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 3: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

9-48. INSPECTION. Hands, clothing, and
tools must be free of oil, grease, and dirt when
working with oxygen equipment. Traces of
these organic materials near compressed oxygen may result in spontaneous combustion,
explosions, and/or fire.
a. Oxygen Tanks and Cylinders. Inspect
the entire exterior surface of the cylinder for
indication of abuse, dents, bulges, and strap
chafing.
(1) Examine the neck of cylinder for
cracks, distortion, or damaged threads.
(2) Check the cylinder to determine if
the markings are legible.
(3) Check the date of the last hydrostatic test. If the periodic retest date is past, do
not return the cylinder to service until the test
has been accomplished.
(4) Inspect the cylinder mounting
bracket, bracket hold-down bolts, and cylinderholding straps for cracks, deformation, cleanliness, and security of attachment.
(5) In the immediate area where the
cylinder is stored or secured, check for evidence of any types of interference, chafing, deformation, or deterioration.
b. Lines and Fittings.
(1) Inspect oxygen lines for chafing,
corrosion, flat spots and irregularities, i.e.,
sharp bends, kinks, and inadequate security.
(2) Check fittings for corrosion around
the threaded area where lines are joined. Pressurize the system and check for leaks. (See
paragraph 9-49b(2)(d).)
CAUTION: In pressurizing the system, actuate the valve slowly to avoid
surging which could rupture the line.
c. Regulators, Valves, and Gauges.
(1) Examine all parts for cracks, nicks,
damaged threads or other apparent damage.
(2) Actuate the regulator controls and
the valve to check for ease of operation.
(3) Determine if the gauge is functioning properly by observing the pressure buildup and the return to zero when the system oxygen is bled off.
d. Masks and Hoses.
(1) Check the oxygen mask for fabric
cracks and rough face seals. If the mask is a
full-face model, inspect the glass or plastic for
cleanliness and state of repair.
(2) When appropriate, with due regard
to hygienic considerations, the sealing qualities
of an oxygen mask may be tested by placing a
thumb over the connection at the end of the
mask tube and inhaling very lightly. Remove
the thumb from the disconnect after each continuous inhalation. If there is no leakage, the
mask will adhere tightly to the face during inhalation, and definite resistance to inhalation
will be noticeable.
(3) Flex the mask hose gently over its
entirety and check for evidence of deterioration or dirt.
(4) Examine the mask and hose storage
compartment for cleanliness and general condition.
(5) If the mask and hose storage compartment is provided with a cover or release
mechanism, thoroughly check the operation of
the mechanism.
