AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 3: EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT

9-38. LIFE RAFT INSPECTIONS. Inspection of life rafts should be performed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications. General inspection procedures
to be performed on most life rafts are as follows.
CAUTION: Areas where life rafts are
inspected or tested must be smooth,
free of splinters, sharp projections,
and oil stains. Floors with abrasive
characteristics, such as concrete or
rough wood, will be covered with untreated tarpaulins or heavy clean paper.
a. Inspect life rafts for cuts, tears, or
other damage to the rubberized material. If the
raft is found to be in good condition, remove
the CO bottle(s) and inflate the raft with air to
2
a pressure of 2 psi. The air should be introduced at the fitting normally connected to the
CO bottle(s). After at least 1 hour, to allow
2
for the air within the raft to adjust itself to the
ambient temperature, check pressure and adjust, if necessary, to 2 psi and allow the raft to
stand for 24 hours. If, after 24 hours, the pressure is less than 1 psi, examine the raft for
leakage by using soapy water. In order to
eliminate pressure variations due to temperature differences at the time the initial and final
reading are taken, test the raft in a room where
the temperature is fairly constant. If the pressure drop is satisfactory, the raft should be
considered as being in an airworthy condition
and returned to service after being fitted with
correctly charged CO bottles as determined by
2
weighing them. Rafts more than 5 years old
are likely to be unairworthy due to deterioration. It is suggested that serviceable rafts be
marked to indicate the date of inspection and
that soapstone be used when folding them preparatory to insertion into the carrying case.
Take care to see that all of the raft’s required
equipment is on board and properly stowed. If
the raft lanyard, used to prevent the raft from
floating away from the airplane, is in need of
replacement, use a lanyard not less than 20 feet
long and having a breaking strength of about
75 pounds.
b. It is recommended that the aforementioned procedure be repeated every 18 months
using the CO bottle(s) for inflation. If a sin2
gle bottle is used for inflating both compartments, it should be noted whether the inflation
is proceeding equally to both compartments.
Occasionally, the formation of “carbon-dioxide
snow” may occur in one passage of the distribution manifold and divert a larger volume of
gas to one compartment, which may burst if
the mattress valve is not open to relieve the
pressure. If the pressure is satisfactory, return
the raft to service in accordance with the procedure outlined.
c. Inspect the CO cylinder for evidence
2
of cross-threading or stripping.
d. Inspect the CO bottle inflation valve
2
cable rigging as follows.
(1) Remove the screws that attach the
cover plate to the valve and remove the cover
plate.
(2) Inspect the firing line cable ball
swage for engagement in the correct recess for
either “Upward Pull” or “Downward Pull.”
The cable will be wrapped around the sheave
approximately 270 degrees.
(3) Reposition the cable ball swage as
required. (See figure 9-12.)
(4) Replace the cover plate. The green
dot on the sheave should be visible through the
window in the cover plate, indicating a
charged cylinder.
e. Check the CO cylinder release cable
2
and housing for condition and security.
f. Make sure the safety deflector is removed from the cylinder outlet before connecting the cylinder to the raft. (See
figure 9-12.)
g. Stencil the life raft’s inspection date on
the raft.
