AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 2: HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS

9-28. HANDLING HYDRAULIC FLUID.
In addition to any other instructions provided
in the aircraft maintenance manual or by the
fluid supplier, the following general precautions must be observed in the handling of hydraulic fluids:
a. Ensure that each aircraft hydraulic
system is properly identified to show the kind
of fluid to be used in the system. Identification
at the filler cap or valve must clearly show the
type of fluid to be used or added.
b. Never allow different categories of hydraulic fluids to become mixed. Chemical reactions may occur, fire resistant fluids may
lose their fire resistance, seals may be damaged, etc.
c. Never, under any circumstances, service an aircraft system with a fluid different
from that shown on the instruction plate.
d. Make certain that hydraulic fluids and
fluid containers are protected from contamination of any kind. Dirt particles may cause hydraulic units to become inoperative, cause seal
damage, etc. If there is any question regarding
the cleanliness of the fluid, do not use it.
Containers for hydraulic fluid must never be
left open to air longer than necessary.
e. Do not expose fluids to high temperature or open flames. Mineral-based fluids are
highly flammable.
f. The hydrocarbon-based hydraulic
fluids are, in general, safe to handle. To work
with these fluids, reasonable handling procedures must always be followed. Take precaution to avoid fluid getting in the eyes. If fluid
contacts the eye, wash immediately with water.
g. When handling Skydrol/Hyjet hydraulic fluids, gloves that are impervious to
the fluid must be worn. If skin contact occurs,
wash with soap and water.
h. When handling phosphate esterbased fluid use eye protection. If the eye is
exposed to fluid, severe eye pain will occur.
i. When Skydrol/Hyjet mist or vapor
exposure is possible, a respirator capable of
removing organic vapors and mists must be
worn.
j. Ingestion of any hydraulic fluid
should be avoided. Although small amounts
do not appear to be highly hazardous, any significant amount should be tested in accordance
with manufacturer’s direction, followed with
hospital supervised stomach treatment.
