AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 9: AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  Section 2: HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS

9-29. HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MAINTENANCE PRACTICES. The maintenance of
hydraulic and pneumatic systems should be
performed in accordance with the aircraft
manufacturer’s instructions. The following is
a summary of general practices followed when
dealing with hydraulic and pneumatic systems.
a. Service. The servicing of hydraulic and
pneumatic systems should be performed at the
intervals specified by the manufacturer. Some
components, such as hydraulic reservoirs, have
servicing information adjacent to the component. When servicing a hydraulic reservoir,
make certain to use the correct type of fluid.
Hydraulic fluid type can be identified by color
and smell; however, it is good practice to take
fluid from the original marked container and
then to check the fluid by color and smell for
verification. Fluid containers should always
be closed, except when fluid is being removed.
b. Contamination Control. Contamination, both particulate and chemical, is detrimental to the performance and life of components in the aircraft hydraulic system. Contamination enters the system through normal
wear of components, by ingestion through external seals, during servicing, or maintenance
when the system is opened to replace/repair
components, etc. To control the particulate
contamination in the system, filters are installed in the pressure line, in the return line,
and in the pump case drain line of each system.
The filter rating is given in terms of “micron,”
and is an indication of the particle size that
will be filtered out. The replacement interval
of these filters is established by the manufacturer and is included in the maintenance manual. However, in the absence of specific replacement instructions, a recommended service life of the filter elements is:
filters3000
Pressure hrs.
Filters1500
Return hrs.
filters600
Case drain hrs.
(1) When replacing filter elements, be
sure that there is no pressure on the filter bowl.
Protective clothing and a face shield must be
used to prevent fluid from contacting the eye.
Replace the element with one that has the
proper rating. After the filter element has been
replaced, the system must be pressure tested to
ensure that the sealing element in the filter assembly is intact.
(2) In the event of a major component
failure, such as a pump, consideration must be
given to replacing the system filter elements,
as well as the failed component. System filters
may also be equipped with differential pres(∆P)
sure indicators. These indicators are designed to “pop-up” when the pressure drop
across the element reaches a predetermined
value caused by contamination held by the
element. The indicators are designed to prevent false indications due to cold start, pump
ripple, and shock loads. Consequently, a filter
whose indicator has been activated must be replaced. In fact, some indicator designs are
such that the indicator cannot be reset, unless
the filter bowl is removed and the element replaced.
c. Flushing a Hydraulic System. When
inspection of hydraulic filters or hydraulic
fluid evaluation indicates that the fluid is contaminated, flushing the system may be necessary. This must be done according to the
manufacturer’s instructions; however, a typical
procedure for flushing is as follows:
(1) Connect a ground hydraulic test
stand to the inlet and outlet test ports of the
system. Verify that the ground unit fluid is
clean and contains the same fluid as the aircraft.
(2) Change the system filters.
(3) Pump clean, filtered fluid through
the system, and operate all subsystems until no
obvious signs of contamination are found
during inspection of the filters. Dispose of
contaminated fluid and filter. (Note: A visual
inspection of hydraulic filters is not always effective.)
(4) Disconnect the test stand and cap
the ports.
(5) Ensure that the reservoir is filled to
the FULL line or proper service level.
d. Inspections. Hydraulic and pneumatic
systems are inspected for leakage, worn or
damaged tubing, worn or damaged hoses, wear
of moving parts, security of mounting for all
units, safetying, and any other condition specified by the maintenance manual. A complete
inspection includes considering the age, cure
date, stiffness of the hose, and an operational
check of all subsystems.
(1) Leakage from any stationary connection in a system is not permitted, and if
found, it should be repaired. A small amount
of fluid seepage may be permitted on actuator
piston rods and rotating shafts. In a hydraulic
system, a thin film of fluid in these areas indicates that the seals are being properly lubricated. When a limited amount of leakage is
allowed at any point, it is usually specified in
the appropriate manual.
(2) Tubing should not be nicked, cut,
dented, collapsed, or twisted beyond approved
limits. The identification markings or lines on
a flexible hose will show whether the hose has
been twisted. (See figure 9.9.)
(3) All connections and fittings associated with moving units must be examined for
play evidencing wear. Such units should be in
an unpressurized condition when they are
checked for wear.
(4) Accumulators must be checked for
leakage, air or gas preload, and position. If the
accumulator is equipped with a pressure
gauge, the preload can be read directly.
(5) An operational check of the system
can be performed using the engine-driven
pump, an electrically-operated auxiliary pump
(if such a pump is included in the system), or a
ground test unit. The entire system and each
subsystem should be checked for smooth operation, unusual noises, and speed of operation
for each unit. The pressure section of the system should be checked with no subsystems to
see that pressure holds for the required time
without the pump supplying the system. System pressure should be observed during operation of each subsystem to ensure that the engine-driven pump maintains the required pressure.
e. Troubleshooting. Hydraulic system
troubleshooting varies according to the complexity of the system and the components in
the system. It is, therefore, important that the
technician refer to the troubleshooting information furnished by the manufacturer.
(1) Lack of pressure in a system can be
caused by a sheared pump shaft, defective relief valve, the pressure regulator, an unloading
valve stuck in the “kicked-out” position, lack
of fluid in the system, the check valve installed
backward, or any condition that permits free
flow back to the reservoir or overboard. If a
system operates satisfactorily with a ground
test unit but not with the system pump, the
pump should be examined.
(2) If a system fails to hold pressure in
the pressure section, the likely cause is the
pressure regulator, an unloading valve, a leaking relief valve, or a leaking check valve.
(3) If the pump fails to keep pressure up
during operation of the subsystem, the pump
may be worn or one of the pressure-control
units may be leaking.
(4) High pressure in a system may be
caused by a defective or improperly-adjusted
pressure regulator, an unloading valve, or by
an obstruction in a line or control unit.
(5) Unusual noise in a hydraulic system,
such as banging and chattering, may be caused
by air or contamination in the system. Such
noises can also be caused by a faulty pressure
regulator, another pressure-control unit, or a
lack of proper accumulator action.
(6) Maintenance of hydraulic system
components involves a number of standard
practices together with specialized procedures
set forth by manufacturers such as the replacement of valves, actuators, and other
units, including tubing and hoses. Care should
be exercised to prevent system contamination
damage to seals, packings, and other parts, and
to apply proper torque in connecting fittings.
When installing fittings, valves, etc. always
lubricate the threads with hydraulic fluid.
(7) Overhaul of hydraulic and pneumatic units is usually accomplished in approved repair facilities; however, replacement
of seals and packings may be done from time
to time by technicians in the field. When a
unit is disassembled, all O-ring and Chevron
seals should be removed and replaced with
new seals. The new seals must be of the same
material as the original and must carry the correct manufacturer’s part number. No seal
should be installed unless it is positively identified as the correct part and the shelf life has
not expired.
(8) When installing seals, care should
be exercised to ensure that the seal is not
scratched, cut, or otherwise damaged. When it
is necessary to install a seal over sharp edges,
the edges must be covered with shim stock,
plastic sheet, or electrical tape.
(9) The replacement of hydraulic units
and tubing usually involves the spillage of
some hydraulic fluid. Care should be taken to
ensure that the spillage of fluid is kept to a
minimum by closing valves, if available, and
by plugging lines immediately after they are
disconnected. All openings in hydraulic systems should be capped or plugged to prevent
contamination of the system.
(10) The importance of the proper
torque applied to all nuts and fittings in a system cannot be over-emphasized. Too much
torque will damage metal and seals, and too
little torque will result in leaks and loose parts.
The proper torque wrenches with the appropriate range should be used in assembling system
units.
f. Disposal of Used Hydraulic Fluids. In
the absence of organizational guidelines, the
technician should be guided by local, state, and
federal regulations, with regard to means of
disposal of used hydraulic fluid. Presently, the
most universally accepted procedure for disposal of phosphate ester-based fluid is incineration.
