AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 10: WEIGHT AND BALANCE  Section 2: WEIGHING PROCEDURES

10-15. PROCEDURES. Accepted procedures when weighing an aircraft are:
a. Remove excessive dirt, grease, moisture, etc., from the aircraft before weighing.
b. Weigh the aircraft inside a closed
building to prevent error in scale reading due
to wind.
c. Determine the empty weight c. g. by
placing the aircraft in a level flight attitude.
d. Have all items of equipment that are
included in the certificated empty weight report installed in the aircraft when weighing.
These items of equipment are a part of the current weight and balance report.
e. The scales should have a current calibration before weighing begins. Zero and use
the scales in accordance with the scale manufacturer’s instructions. Platform scales and
suitable support for the aircraft, if necessary,
are usually placed under the wheels of a landplane, the keel of a seaplane float, or the skis
of a skiplane. Other structural locations capable of supporting the aircraft, such as jack
pads, may be used. Clearly indicate these
points and the alternate equipment used in the
weight and balance report.
f. Drain the fuel system until the quantity
indicator reads zero or until the tanks are
empty with the aircraft in level flight attitude,
unless otherwise noted in the TCDS or Aircraft
Specifications. The amount of fuel remaining in
the tank, lines, and engine is termed residual fuel
and is to be included in the empty weight. In special cases, the aircraft may be weighed with
full fuel in tanks provided a definite means of
determining the exact weight of the fuel is
available.
g. The oil system should be filled to the
quantity noted in the TCDS or Aircraft Specifications.
NOTE: On Civil Aeronautics Regulations (CAR-3) Certified Aircraft, the
weight of the oil was subtracted
mathematically to get the empty
weight. In 14 CFR, part 23 aircraft,
the weight of the oil is included in the
empty weight.
When weighed with full oil, actual empty
weight equals the actual recorded weight less
the weight of the oil in the oil tank( oil weight
= oil capacity in gallons x 7.5 pounds). Indicate on all weight and balance reports whether
weights include full oil or oil drained. (See figure 10-9.)
h. Do not set brakes while taking scale
reading.
i. Note any tare reading when the aircraft
is removed from the scales.
10-15a. REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS
are the major sources of weight changes, and it
is the responsibility of the aircraft mechanic
making any repairs or alteration to know the
weight and location of these changes, and to
compute the new CG and record the new
empty (EW) weight and EWCG data in the
aircraft flight manual.
10-15b. ANNUAL OR 100-HOUR INSPECTION. After conducting an annual or
100-hour inspection, the aircraft mechanic
aircraft records is current and accurate.
