AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 10: WEIGHT AND BALANCE  Section 1: TERMINOLOGY

10-2. TERMINOLOGY. The following
terminology is used in the practical application
of weight and balance control.
a. Maximum Weight. The maximum
weight is the maximum authorized weight of
the aircraft and its contents as listed in the
specifications.
b. Empty Weight. The empty weight of
an aircraft includes all operating equipment
that has a fixed location and is actually installed in the aircraft. It includes the weight of
the airframe, powerplant, required equipment,
optional and special equipment, fixed ballast,
full engine coolant, hydraulic fluid, residual
fuel, and oil. Additional information regarding
fluids that may be contained in the aircraft
systems and must be included in the empty
weight will be indicated in the pertinent Aircraft Specifications or TCDS.
c. Negligible Weight Change is any
change of one pound or less for aircraft whose
weight empty is less than 5,000 pounds; two
pounds or less for aircraft whose weight empty
is more than 5,000 and 50,000 pounds; and
five pounds or less for aircraft whose weight
empty is more than 50,000 pounds. Negligible
c. g. change is any change of less than 0.05%
MAC for fixed wing aircraft, 0.2 percent of the
maximum allowable c. g. range for rotary wing
aircraft.
d. Useful Load. The useful load is the
empty weight subtracted from the maximum
weight of the aircraft. This load consists of the
pilot, crew (if applicable), maximum oil, fuel,
passengers, and baggage unless otherwise
noted.
e. Weight Check. The weight check consists of checking the sum of the weights of all
items of useful load against the authorized useful load (maximum weight less empty weight)
of the aircraft.
f. Datum. The datum is an imaginary
vertical plane from which all horizontal measurements are taken for balance purposes with
the aircraft in level flight attitude. The datum
is indicated in most Aircraft Specifications or
TCDS. On some of the older aircraft, when
the datum is not indicated, any convenient datum may be selected. Once the datum is selected, all moment arms and the location of the
permissible c.g. range must be taken with reference to it. Examples of typical locations of
the datum are shown in figure 10-1.
g. Arm (or Moment Arm). The arm (or
moment arm) is the horizontal distance in
inches from the datum to the c.g. of an item.
The algebraic sign is plus ( + ) if measured aft
[FIG 10-1] Typical datum locations.
of the datum, and minus ( - ) if measured forward of the datum. Examples of plus and minus arms are shown in figure 10-2.
[FIG 10-2] Illustration of arm (or moment arm).
h. Moment. The moment is the product
of a weight multiplied by its arm. The moment
of an item about the datum is obtained by
multiplying the weight of the item by its horizontal distance from the datum. A typical
moment calculation is given in figure 10-3.
i. Center of Gravity. The c.g. is a point
about which the nose-heavy and tail-heavy
moments are exactly equal in magnitude. If
the aircraft is suspended from the c.g., it will
not have a tendency to pitch in either direction
(nose up or down). The weight of the aircraft
(or any object) may be assumed to be concentrated at its c.g. (See figure 10-3.)
j. Empty Weight Center of Gravity.
The empty weight c.g. is the c.g. of an aircraft
in its empty weight condition, and is an essential part of the weight and balance record.
Formulas for determining the c.g. for tail and
nosewheel type aircraft are given in figure 10-4. Typical examples of computing the
empty weight and empty weight c.g. for aircraft are shown in figures 10-5 and 10-6.
k. Empty Weight Center of Gravity
Range. The empty weight c.g. range is determined so that the empty weight c.g. limits will
not be exceeded under standard specifications
loading arrangements. Calculations as outlined in paragraph 10-16 should be completed
when it is possible to load an aircraft in a
manner not covered in the Aircraft Specifications or TCDS (extra tanks, extra seats, etc.).
The empty weight c.g. range, when applicable,
is listed in the Aircraft Specifications or
TCDS. Calculation of empty weight c.g. is
shown in figures 10-5 and 10-6.
l. Operating Center of Gravity Range.
The operating c.g. range is the distance between the forward and rearward c.g. limits indicated in the pertinent Aircraft Specifications
or TCDS. These limits are determined for the
most forward and most rearward loaded c.g.
positions at which the aircraft meets the requirements of Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulation (14 CFR). The limits are indicated
in the specifications in either percent of mean
aerodynamic chord (MAC) or inches from the
[FIG 10-3] Example of moment computation.
datum. The c.g. of the loaded aircraft must be
within these limits at all times as illustrated in
figure 10-7.
m. Mean Aerodynamic Chord (MAC).
The MAC is established by the manufacturer
who defines its leading edge and its trailing
edge in terms of inches from the datum. The
c.g. location and various limits are then expressed in percentages of the chord. The
location and dimensions of the MAC can be
found in the Aircraft Specifications, the
TCDS, the aircraft flight manual, or the aircraft weight and balance report.
n. Weighing Point. If the c.g. location is
determined by weighing, it is necessary to obtain horizontal measurements between the
points on the scale at which the aircraft’s
weight is concentrated. If weighed using
[FIG 10-4] Empty weight center of gravity formulas.
[FIG 10-5] Empty weight and empty center of gravity
- tail-wheel type aircraft.
[FIG 10-6] Empty weight and empty weight center of
gravity - nosewheel-type aircraft.
[FIG 10-7] Operating center of gravity range.
scales under the landing gear tires, a vertical
line passing through the centerline of the axle
will locate the point on the scale at which the
weight is concentrated. This point is called the
“weighing point.” Other structural locations
capable of supporting the aircraft, such as jack
pads on the main spar, may also be used if the
aircraft weight is resting on the jack pads. Indicate these points clearly in the weight and
balance report when used instead of the landing gear. Typical locations of the weighing
points are shown in figure 10-8.
o. Zero Fuel Weight. The maximum
permissible weight of a loaded aircraft (passengers, crew, cargo, etc.) less its fuel is zero
fuel weight. All weights in excess of maximum zero fuel weight must consist of usable
fuel.
p. Minimum Fuel. The minimum fuel for
balance purposes is 1/12 gallon per maximumexcept-take-off horsepower (METO). Minimum fuel is the maximum amount of fuel
which can be used in weight and balance computations when low fuel might adversely affect
the most critical balance conditions. To determine the weight of fuel in pounds divide the
METO horsepower by two.
q. Full Oil. The full oil is the quantity of
oil shown in the Aircraft Specifications or
TCDS as oil capacity. Use full oil as the
quantity of oil when making the loaded weight
and balance computations.
r. Tare. The weight of chocks, blocks,
stands, etc., used when weighing aircraft is
called tare and is included in the scale readings. Tare is deducted from the scale reading
at each respective weighing point when tare is
involved, to obtain the actual aircraft weight.
[FIG 10-8] Weighing point centerline.
10-3.10-13.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 2 WEIGHING PROCEDURES
