AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 4: INSPECTION OF CIRCUIT-PROTECTION DEVICES

11-48. DETERMINATION OF CIRCUIT
BREAKER RATINGS. Circuit protection
devices must be sized to supply open circuit
capability. A circuit breaker must be rated so
that it will open before the current rating of the
wire attached to it is exceeded, or before the
cumulative rating of all loads connected to it
are exceeded, whichever is lowest. A circuit
breaker must always open before any component downstream can overheat and generate
smoke or fire. Wires must be sized to carry
continuous current in excess of the circuit
protective device rating, including its timecurrent characteristics, and to avoid excessive
voltage drop. Refer to section 5 for wire rating
methods.
11-48. RELAYS. A relay is an electrically
controlled device that opens and closes electrical contacts to effect the operation of other devices in the same or in another electrical circuit. The relay converts electrical energy into
mechanical energy through various means, and
through mechanical linkages, actuates electrical conductors (contacts) that control electrical
circuits. Solid-state relays may also be used in
electrical switching applications.
a. Use of Relays. Most relays are used as
a switching device where a weight reduction
can be achieved, or to simplify electrical controls. It should be remembered that the relay is
an electrically operated switch, and therefore
subject to dropout under low system voltage
conditions.
b. Types of Connections. Relays are
manufactured with various connective means
from mechanical to plug-in devices. Installation procedures vary by the type of connection
and should be followed to ensure proper operation of the relay.
c. Repair. Relays are complicated electromechanical assemblies and most are not repairable.
d. Relay Selection.
(1) Contact ratings, as described on the
relay case, describe the make, carry, and break
capability for resistive currents only. Consult
the appropriate specification to determine the
derating factor to use for other types of current
loads. (Ref. MIL-PRF-39016, MIL-PRF-5757,
MIL-PRF-6016, MIL-PRF-835836.)
(2) Operating a relay at less than nominal coil voltage may compromise its performance and should never be done without written
manufacturer approval.
e. Relay Installation and Maintenance.
For installation and maintenance, care should
be taken to ensure proper placement of hardware, especially at electrical connections. The
use of properly calibrated torque wrenches and
following the manufacturer’s installation procedures is strongly recommended. This is especially important with hermetically sealed
relays, since the glass-to-metal seal (used for
insulation of the electrically “live” components) is especially vulnerable to catastrophic
failure as a result of overtorquing.
(1) When replacing relays in alternating
current (ac) applications, it is essential to
maintain proper phase sequencing. For any
application involving plug-in relays, proper
engagement of their retaining mechanism is
vital.
(2) The proximity of certain magnetically permanent, magnet assisted, coil operated
relays may cause them to have an impact on
each other. Any manufacturer’s recommendations or precautions must be closely followed.
