AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 15: GROUNDING AND BONDING

11-188. BONDING INSPECTION. Inspect for the following:
a. If there is evidence of electrical arcing, check for intermittent electrical contact
between conducting surfaces, that may become
a part of a ground plane or a current path.
Arcing can be prevented either by bonding, or
by insulation if bonding is not necessary.
b. The metallic conduit should be
bonded to the aircraft structure at each terminating and break point. The conduit bonding
strap should be located ahead of the piece of
equipment that is connected to the cable wire
inside the conduit.
c. Bond connections should be secure and
free from corrosion.
d. Bonding jumpers should be installed
in such a manner as not to interfere in any way
with the operation of movable components of
the aircraft.
e. Self-tapping screws should not be used
for bonding purposes. Only standard threaded
screws or bolts of appropriate size should be
used.
f. Exposed conducting frames or parts
of electrical or electronic equipment should
have a low resistance bond of less than
2.5 millohms to structure. If the equipment
design includes a ground terminal or pin,
which is internally connected to such exposed
parts, a ground wire connection to such terminal will satisfy this requirement. Refer to
manufacturer’s instructions.
g. Bonds should be attached directly to
the basic aircraft structure rather than through
other bonded parts.
h. Bonds must be installed to ensure that
the structure and equipment are electrically
stable and free from the hazards of lightning,
static discharge, electrical shock, etc. To
Figure 11-19. Millivolt drop test.
ensure proper operation and suppression of radio interference from hazards, electrical
bonding of equipment must conform to the
manufacturer’s specifications.
i. Use of bonding testers is strongly recommended.
j. Measurements should be performed
after the grounding and bonding mechanical
connections are complete to determine if the
measured resistance values meet the basic requirements. A high quality test instrument
(AN AN/USM-21A or equivalent) is required
to accurately measure the very low resistance
values specified in this document. Another
method of measurement is the millivolt drop
test as shown in figure 11-19.
k. Use appropriate washers when bonding aluminum or copper to dissimilar metallic
structures so that any corrosion that may occur
will be on the washer.
