AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 8: WIRING INSTALLATION INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS

11-107. INTERFERENCE TESTS. Perform an interference test for installed equipment and electrical connections as follow:
a. The equipment must be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions. Visually inspect all the installed
equipment to determine that industry standard
workmanship and engineering practices were
used. Verify that all mechanical and electrical
connections have been properly made and that
the equipment has been located and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The wire insulation temperature
rating should also be considered.
b. Power input tests must be conducted
with the equipment powered by the airplane’s
electrical power generating system, unless otherwise specified.
c. All associated electrically operated
equipment and systems on the airplane must
be on and operating before conducting interference tests, unless otherwise specified.
d. The effects on interference must be
evaluated as follows:
(1) The equipment shall not be the
source of harmful conducted or radiated interference or adversely affect other equipment or
systems installed in the airplane.
(2) With the equipment energized on
the ground, individually operate other electrically operated equipment and systems on the
airplane to determine that no significant conducted or radiated interference exists. Evaluate all reasonable combinations of control settings and operating modes. Operate communication and navigation equipment on at least
one low, high and mid-band frequency. Make
note of systems or modes of operation that
should also be evaluated during flight.
(3) For airplane equipment and systems
that can be checked only in flight, determine
that no operationally significant conducted or
radiated interference exists. Evaluate all reasonable combinations of control settings and
operating modes. Operate communications
and navigation equipment on at least one low,
high and mid-band frequency.
NOTE: Electromagnetic compatibility problems which develop after installation of this equipment may result
from such factors as design characteristics of previously installed systems
or equipment, and the physical installation itself. It is not intended that
the equipment manufacturer should
design for all installation environments. The installing facility will be
responsible for resolving any incompatibility between this equipment and
previously installed equipment in the
airplane. The various factors contributing to the incompatibility should
be considered.
NOTE: Ground EMI test have consistently been found adequate for follow-on approvals of like or identical
equipment types, irrespective of the
airplane model used for the initial approval. Radio frequency transmission
devices, such as wireless telephones,
must also be tested with respect to
their transmission frequencies and
harmonics.
