AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 1: INSPECTION AND CARE OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS

11-2. INSPECTION AND OPERATION
CHECKS. Inspect equipment, electrical assemblies, and wiring installations for damage,
general condition, and proper functioning to
ensure the continued satisfactory operation of
the electrical system. Adjust, repair, overhaul,
and test electrical equipment and systems in
accordance with the recommendations and
procedures in the aircraft and/or component
manufacturer’s maintenance instructions. Replace components of the electrical system that
are damaged or defective with identical parts,
with aircraft manufacturer’s approved equipment, or its equivalent to the original in operating characteristics, mechanical strength, and
environmental specifications. A list of suggested problems to look for and checks (Refer
to the glossary for a description of the check
types) to be performed are:
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
CARE OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
a. Damaged, discolored, or overheated
equipment, connections, wiring, and installations.
b. Excessive heat or discoloration at high
current carrying connections.
c. Misalignment of electrically driven
equipment.
d. Poor electrical bonding (broken, disconnected or corroded bonding strap) and
grounding, including evidence of corrosion.
e. Dirty equipment and connections.
f. Improper, broken, inadequately supported wiring and conduit, loose connections
of terminals, and loose ferrules.
g. Poor mechanical or cold solder joints.
h. Condition of circuit breaker and
fuses.
i. Insufficient clearance between exposed
current carrying parts and ground or poor insulation of exposed terminals.
j. Broken or missing safety wire, broken
bundle lacing, cotter pins, etc.
k. Operational check of electrically operated equipment such as motors, inverters, generators, batteries, lights, protective devices,
etc.
l. Ensure that ventilation and cooling air
passages are clear and unobstructed.
m. Voltage check of electrical system
with portable precision voltmeter.
n. Condition of electric lamps.
o. Missing safety shields on exposed
high-voltage terminals (i.e., 115/200V ac).
