AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 8: WIRING INSTALLATION INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS

11-100. CONNECTORS. Ensure reliability
of connectors by verifying that the following
conditions are met or that repairs are effected
as required.
a. Inspect connectors for security and
evidence of overheating (cause of over-heating
must be corrected), and exteriors for corrosion
and cracks. Also, wires leading to connectors
must be inspected for deterioration due to
overheating. Replace corroded connections
and overheated connectors.
b. Ensure installation of cable clamp
(reference MIL-C-85049) adapters on applicable MS connectors, except those that are
moisture-proof.
c. See that silicone tape is wrapped
around wires in MS3057 cable clamp adapters
so that tightening of the cable clamp adapter
cap provides sufficient grip on the wires to
keep tension from being applied to the connector pins.
d. Make sure unused plugs and receptacles are covered to prevent inclusion of dust
and moisture. Receptacles should have metal
or composite dust caps attached by their normal mating method. Plugs may have a dust
cap similar to above or have a piece of
polyolefin shrink sleeving shrunk over the
connector, starting from the backshell threads,
with a tail sufficiently long enough to doubleback over the connector and be tied with polyester lacing tape behind the coupling nut. The
cable identification label should be visible behind the connector or a tag should be attached
identifying the associated circuit or attaching
equipment. The connector should be attached
to structure by its normal mounting means or
by the use of appropriate clamps.
e. Ensure that connectors are fully mated
by checking position and tightness of coupling
ring or its alignment with fully mated indicator
line on receptacle, if applicable.
f. Ensure that the coupling nut of MS
connectors is safetied, by wire or other mechanical locking means, as required by applicable aircraft instructional manuals.
g. Ensure that moisture-absorbent material is not used as “fill” for MS3057 clamps
or adapters.
h. Ensure that there is no evidence of
deterioration such as cracking, missing, or
disintegration of the potting material.
i. Identical connectors in adjacent locations can lead to incorrect connections. When
such installations are unavoidable, the attached
wiring must be clearly identified and must be
routed and clamped so that it cannot be mismatched.
j. Connectors in unpressurized areas
should be positioned so that moisture will
drain out of them when unmated. Wires exiting connectors must be routed so that moisture
drains away from them.
