AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 15: GROUNDING AND BONDING

11-186. GROUNDING. Grounding is the
process of electrically connecting conductive
objects to either a conductive structure or some
other conductive return path for the purpose of
safely completing either a normal or fault circuit.
a. Types of Grounding. If wires carrying
return currents from different types of sources,
such as signals of DC and AC generators, are
connected to the same ground point or have a
common connection in the return paths, an interaction of the currents will occur. Mixing
return currents from various sources should be
avoided because noise will be coupled from
one source to another and can be a major
problem for digital systems. To minimize the
interaction between various return currents,
different types of grounds should be identified
and used. As a minimum, the design should
use three ground types: (1) ac returns, (2) dc
returns, and (3) all others. For distributed
power systems, the power return point for an
alternative power source would be separated.
For example, in a two-ac generator (one on the
right side and the other on the left side) system, if the right ac generator were supplying
backup power to equipment located in the left
side, (left equipment rack) the backup ac
ground return should be labeled “ac Right”.
The return currents for the left generator
should be connected to a ground point labeled
“ac Left”
b. Current Return Paths. The design of
the ground return circuit should be given as
much attention as the other leads of a circuit.
A requirement for proper ground connections
is that they maintain an impedance that is essentially constant. Ground return circuits
should have a current rating and voltage drop
adequate for satisfactory operation of the connected electrical and electronic equipment.
EMI problems, that can be caused by a system’s power wire, can be reduced substantially
by locating the associated ground return near
the origin of the power wiring (e.g. circuit
breaker panel) and routing the power wire and
its ground return in a twisted pair. Special care
should be exercised to ensure replacement on
ground return leads. The use of numbered insulated wire leads instead of bare grounding
jumpers may aid in this respect. In general,
equipment items should have an external
ground connection, even when internally
grounded. Direct connections to a magnesium
(which may create a fire hazard) structure must
not be used for ground return.
c. Heavy-Current Grounds. Power
ground connections, for generators, transformer rectifiers, batteries, external power receptacles, and other heavy-current, loads must
be attached to individual grounding brackets
that are attached to aircraft structure with a
proper metal-to-metal bonding attachment.
This attachment and the surrounding structure
must provide adequate conductivity to accommodate normal and fault currents of the
system without creating excessive voltage drop
or damage to the structure. At least three fasteners, located in a triangular or rectangular
pattern, must be used to secure such brackets
in order to minimize susceptibility to loosening under vibration. If the structure is fabricated of a material such as carbon fiber composite (CFC), which has a higher resistivity
than aluminum or copper, it will be necessary
to provide an alternative ground path(s) for
power return current. Special attention should
be considered for composite aircraft.
d. Current Return Paths for Internally
Grounded Equipment. Power return or fault
current ground connections within flammable
vapor areas must be avoided. If they must be
made, make sure these connections will not
arc, spark, or overheat under all possible current flow or mechanical failure conditions, including induced lightning currents. Criteria
for inspection and maintenance to ensure continued airworthiness throughout the expected
life of the aircraft should be established.
Power return fault currents are normally the
highest currents flowing in a structure. These
can be the full generator current capacity. If
full generator fault current flows through a localized region of the carbon fiber structure,
major heating and failure can occur. CFC and
other similar low-resistive materials must not
be used in power return paths. Additional
voltage drops in the return path can cause voltage regulation problems. Likewise, repeated
localized material heating by current surges
can cause material degradation. Both problems may occur without warning and cause
nonrepeatable failures or anomalies.
e. Common Ground Connections. The
use of common ground connections for more
than one circuit or function should be avoided
except where it can be shown that related malfunctions that could affect more than one circuit will not result in a hazardous condition.
Even when the loss of multiple systems does
not, in itself, create a hazard, the effect of such
failure can be quite distracting to the crew.
(1) Redundant systems are normally
provided with the objective of assuring continued safe operation in the event of failure of a
single channel and must therefore be grounded
at well separated points. To avoid construction
or maintenance errors that result in connecting
such ground at a single point, wires that
ground one channel of a redundant system
should be incapable of reaching the ground
attachment of the other channel.
(2) The use of loop type grounding
systems (several ground leads connected in series with a ground to structure at each end)
must be avoided on redundant systems, because the loss of either ground path will remain undetected, leaving both systems, with a
potential single-point failure.
(3) Electrical power sources must be
grounded at separate locations on the aircraft
structure. The loss of multiple sources of
electrical power, as the result of corrosion of a
ground connection or failure of the related
fasteners, may result in the loss of multiple
systems and should be avoided by making the
ground attachments at separate locations.
(4) Bonds to thermally or vibrationisolated structure require special consideration
to avoid single ground return to primary
structure.
(5) The effect of the interconnection of
the circuits when ungrounded should be considered whenever a common ground connection is used. This is particularly important
when employing terminal junction grounding
modules or other types of gang grounds that
have a single attachment point.
f. Grounds for Sensitive Circuits. Special consideration should be given to grounds
for sensitive circuits. For example:
(1) Grounding of a signal circuit
through a power current lead introduces power
current return voltage drop into the signal circuit.
(2) Running power wires too close will
cause signal interference.
(3) Separately grounding two components of a transducer system may introduce
ground plane voltage variations into the system.
(4) Single point grounds for signal circuits, with such grounds being at the signal
source, are often a good way to minimize the
effects of EMI, lightning, and other sources of
interference.
