AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 8: WIRING INSTALLATION INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS

11-96. GENERAL. Wires and cables
should be inspected for adequacy of support,
protection, and general condition throughout.
The desirable and undesirable features in aircraft wiring installations are listed below and
indicate conditions that may or may not exist.
Accordingly, aircraft wiring must be visually
inspected for the following requirements:
CAUTION: For personal safety, and
to avoid the possibility of fire, turn off
all electrical power prior to starting
an inspection of the aircraft electrical
system or performing maintenance.
a. Wires and cables are supported by
suitable clamps, grommets, or other devices at
intervals of not more than 24 inches, except
when contained in troughs, ducts, or conduits.
The supporting devices should be of a suitable
size and type, with the wires and cables held
securely in place without damage to the insulation.
b. Metal stand-offs must be used to
maintain clearance between wires and structure. Employing tape or tubing is not acceptable as an alternative to stand-offs for maintaining clearance.
c. Phenolic blocks, plastic liners, or
rubber grommets are installed in holes, bulkheads, floors, or structural members where it is
impossible to install off-angle clamps to
maintain wiring separation. In such cases, additional protection in the form of plastic or insulating tape may be used.
d. Wires and cables in junction boxes,
panels, and bundles are properly supported and
laced to provide proper grouping and routing.
INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
e. Clamp retaining screws are properly
secured so that the movement of wires and cables is restricted to the span between the points
of support and not on soldered or mechanical
connections at terminal posts or connectors.
f. Wire and cables are properly supported
and bound so that there is no interference with
other wires, cables, and equipment.
g. Wires and cables are adequately supported to prevent excessive movement in areas
of high vibration.
h. Insulating tubing is secured by tying,
tie straps or with clamps.
i. Continuous lacing (spaced 6 inches
apart) is not used, except in panels and junction boxes where this practice is optional.
When lacing is installed in this manner, outside junction boxes should be removed and replaced with individual loops.
j. Do not use tapes (such as friction or
plastic tape) which will dry out in service, produce chemical reactions with wire or cable insulation, or absorb moisture.
k. Insulating tubing must be kept at a
minimum and must be used to protect wire and
cable from abrasion, chafing, exposure to
fluid, and other conditions which could affect
the cable insulation. However; the use of insulating tubing for support of wires and cable
in lieu of stand-offs is prohibited.
l. Do not use moisture-absorbent material
as “fill” for clamps or adapters.
m. Ensure that wires and cables are not
tied or fastened together in conduit or insulating tubing.
n. Ensure cable supports do not restrict
the wires or cables in such a manner as to interfere with operation of equipment shock
mounts.
o. Do not use tape, tie straps, or cord for
primary support.
p. Make sure that drain holes are present in drip loops or in the lowest portion of
tubing placed over the wiring.
q. Ensure that wires and cables are
routed in such a manner that chafing will not
occur against the airframe or other components.
r. Ensure that wires and cables are positioned in such a manner that they are not
likely to be used as handholds or as support for
personal belongings and equipment.
s. Ensure that wires and cables are
routed, insofar as practicable, so that they are
not exposed to damage by personnel moving
within the aircraft.
t. Ensure that wires and cables are located so as not to be susceptible to damage by
the storage or shifting of cargo.
u. Ensure that wires and cables are
routed so that there is not a possibility of damage from battery electrolytes or other corrosive
fluids.
v. Ensure that wires and cables are adequately protected in wheel wells and other areas where they may be exposed to damage
from impact of rocks, ice, mud, etc. (If rerouting of wires or cables is not practical, protective jacketing may be installed). This type
of installation must be held to a minimum.
w. Where practical, route electrical wires
and cables above fluid lines and provide a 6
inch separation from any flammable liquid,
fuel, or oxygen line, fuel tank wall, or other
low voltage wiring that enters a fuel tank and
requires electrical isolation to prevent an ignition hazard. Where 6 inch spacing cannot
practically be provided, a minimum of 2 inches
must be maintained between wiring and such
lines, related equipment, fuel tank walls and
low voltage wiring that enters a fuel tank.
Such wiring should be closely clamped and
rigidly supported and tied at intervals such that
contact betwe4en such lines, related equipment, fuel tank walls or other wires, would not
occur, assuming a broken wire and a missing
wire tie or clamp.
x. Ensure that a trap or drip loop is
provided to prevent fluids or condensed moisture from running into wires and cables
dressed downward to a connector, terminal
block, panel, or junction box.
y. Wires and cables installed in bilges
and other locations where fluids may be
trapped are routed as far from the lowest point
as possible or otherwise provided with a
moisture-proof covering.
z. Separate wires from high-temperature
equipment, such as resistors, exhaust stacks,
heating ducts, etc., to prevent insulation breakdown. Insulate wires that must run through
hot areas with a high-temperature insulation
material such as fiberglass or PTFE. Avoid
high-temperature areas when using cables
having soft plastic insulation such as polyethylene, because these materials are subject to
deterioration and deformation at elevated temperatures. Many coaxial cables have this type
of insulation.
aa. The minimum radius of bends in
wire groups or bundles must not be less than
10 times the outside diameter of the largest
wire or cable, except that at the terminal strips
where wires break out at terminations or reverse direction in a bundle. Where the wire is
suitably supported, the radius may be 3 times
the diameter of the wire or cable. Where it is
not practical to install wiring or cables within
the radius requirements, the bend should be
enclosed in insulating tubing. The radius for
thermocouple wire should be done in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation and shall be sufficient to avoid excess
losses or damage to the cable.
bb. Ensure that RF cables, e.g., coaxial
and triaxial are bent at a radius of no less than
6 times the outside diameter of the cable.
cc. Ensure that wires and cables, that
are attached to assemblies where relative
movement occurs (such as at hinges and rotating pieces; particularly doors, control sticks,
control wheels, columns, and flight control
surfaces), are installed or protected in such a
manner as to prevent deterioration of the wires
and cables caused by the relative movement of
the assembled parts.
dd. Ensure that wires and electrical cables are separated from mechanical control cables. In no instance should wire be able to
come closer than 1/2 inch to such controls
when light hand pressure is applied to wires or
controls. In cases where clearance is less than
this, adequate support must be provided to
prevent chafing.
ee. Ensure that wires and cables are
provided with enough slack to meet the following requirements:
(1) Permit ease of maintenance.
(2) Prevent mechanical strain on the
wires, cables, junctions, and supports.
(3) Permit free movement of shock and
vibration mounted equipment.
(4) Allow shifting of equipment, as
necessary, to perform alignment, servicing,
tuning, removal of dust covers, and changing
of internal components while installed in aircraft.
ff. Ensure that unused wires are individually dead-ended, tied into a bundle, and
secured to a permanent structure. Each wire
should have strands cut even with the insulation and a pre-insulated closed end connector
or a 1-inch piece of insulating tubing placed
over the wire with its end folded back and tied.
gg. Ensure that all wires and cables are
identified properly at intervals of not more
than 15 inches. Coaxial cables are identified at
both equipment ends.
