AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 2: STORAGE BATTERIES

11-22. INSTALLATION PRACTICES.
a. External Surface. Clean the external
surface of the battery prior to installation in the
aircraft.
b. Replacing Lead-Acid Batteries.
When replacing lead-acid batteries with NiCad
batteries, a battery temperature or current
monitoring system must be installed. Neutralize the battery box or compartment and
thoroughly flush with water and dry. A flight
manual supplement must also be provided for
the NiCad battery installation. Acid residue
can be detrimental to the proper functioning of
a NiCad battery, as alkaline will be to a leadacid battery.
c. Battery Venting. Battery fumes and
gases may cause an explosive mixture or contaminated compartments and should be dispersed by adequate ventilation. Venting systems often use ram pressure to flush fresh air
through the battery case or enclosure to a safe
overboard discharge point. The venting system pressure differential should always be
positive, and remain between recommended
minimum and maximum values. Line runs
should not permit battery overflow fluids or
condensation to be trapped and prevent free
airflow.
d. Battery Sump Jars. A battery sump
jar installation may be incorporated in the
venting system to dispose of battery electrolyte
overflow. The sump jar should be of adequate
design and the proper neutralizing agent used.
The sump jar must be located only on the discharge side of the battery venting system. (See
figure 11-1.)
[FIG 11-1] Battery ventilating systems.
e. Installing Batteries. When installing
batteries in an aircraft, exercise care to prevent
inadvertent shorting of the battery terminals.
Serious damage to the aircraft structure (frame,
skin and other subsystems, avionics, wire, fuel
etc.) can be sustained by the resultant high discharge of electrical energy. This condition
may normally be avoided by insulating the
terminal posts during the installation process.
Remove the grounding lead first for battery
removal, then the positive lead. Connect the
grounding lead of the battery last to minimize
the risk of shorting the “hot terminal” of the
battery during installation.
f. Battery Hold Down Devices. Ensure
that the battery hold down devices are secure,
but not so tight as to exert excessive pressure
that may cause the battery to buckle causing
internal shorting of the battery.
g. Quick-Disconnect Type Battery. If a
quick-disconnect type of battery connector,
that prohibits crossing the battery lead is not
employed, ensure that the aircraft wiring is
connected to the proper battery terminal. Reverse polarity in an electrical system can seriously damage a battery and other electrical
components. Ensure that the battery cable
connections are tight to prevent arcing or a
high resistance connection.
11-23.11-29.
[RESERVED.]
SECTION 3. INSPECTION OF
