AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 4: INSPECTION OF CIRCUIT-PROTECTION DEVICES

11-53. SWITCHES. In all circuits where a
switch malfunction can be hazardous, a switch
specifically designed for aircraft service should
be used. These switches are of rugged construction and have sufficient contact capacity
to break, make, and continuously carry the
connected load current. The position of the
switch should be checked with an electrical
meter.
a. Electrical Switch Inspection. Special
attention should be given to electrical circuit
switches, especially the spring-loaded type,
during the course of normal airworthiness inspection. An internal failure of the springloaded type may allow the switch to remain
closed even though the toggle or button returns
to the “off” position. During inspection, attention should also be given to the possibility
that improper switch substitution may have
been made.
(1) With the power off suspect aircraft
electrical switches should be checked in the
ON position for opens (high resistance) and in
The OFF position for shorts (low resistance),
with an ohmmeter.
(2) Any abnormal side to side movement of the switch should be an alert to imminent failure even if the switch tested was
shown to be acceptable with an ohmmeter.
b. Electromechanical Switches.
Switches have electrical contacts and various
types of switch actuators (i.e., toggle, plunger,
push-button, knob, rocker).
(1) Contacts designed for high-level
loads must not be subsequently used for lowlevel applications, unless testing has been performed to establish this capability.
(2) Switches are specifically selected
based on the design for the aircraft service current ratings for lamp loads, inductive loads,
and motor loads and must be replaced with
identical make and model switches.
c. Proximity Switches. These switches
are usually solid-state devices that detect the
presence of a predetermined target without
physical contact and are usually rated 0.5 amps
or less.
d. Switch Rating. The nominal current
rating of the conventional aircraft switch is
usually stamped on the switch housing and
represents the continuous current rating with
the contacts closed. Switches should be derated from their nominal current rating for the
following types of circuits:
(1) Circuits containing incandescent
lamps can draw an initial current that is
15 times greater than the continuous current.
Contact burning or welding may occur when
the switch is closed.
(2) Inductive circuits have magnetic energy stored in solenoid or relay coils that is
released when the control switch is opened and
may appear as an arc.
(3) Direct-current motors will draw
several times their rated current during starting, and magnetic energy stored in their
armature and field coils is released when the
control switch is opened.
e. Switch Selection. Switches for aircraft
use should be selected with extreme caution.
The contact ratings should be adequate for all
load conditions and applicable voltages, at
both sea level and the operational altitude.
Consideration should be given to the variation
in the electrical power characteristics, using
MIL-STD-704 as a guide.
f. Derating Factors. Table 11-4 provides
an approximate method for derating nominal
ratings to obtain reasonable switch efficiency
and service life under reactive load conditions.
WARNING: Do not use AC derated
switches in DC circuits. AC switches
will not carry the same amperage as a
DC switch.
[TABLE 11-4] Switch derating factors.
Nominal Type of Load Derating
System Factor
Voltage
28 VDC Lamp 8
28 VDC Inductive (relay-solenoid) 4
28 VDC Resistive (Heater) 2
28 VDC Motor 3
12 VDC Lamp 5
12 VDC Inductive (relay-solenoid) 2
12 VDC Resistive (Heater) 1
12 VDC Motor 2
NOTES:
1. To find the nominal rating of a switch required to operate
a given device, multiply the continuous current rating
of the device by the derating factor corresponding
to the voltage and type of load.
2. To find the continuous rating that a switch of a
given nominal rating will handle efficiently,
divide the switch nominal rating by the derating
factor corresponding to the voltage and type of load.
g. Low Energy Loads. Switches rated
for use at 28 VDC or more, and at 1.0 amp or
more, generally have silver contacts. In general, silver contacts should not be used to control devices which have either a voltage less
than 8 volts or a continuous current less than
0.5 amps unless the switch is specifically rated
for use with low-energy loads. Table 11-5
provides general guidelines for selecting contact materials for low-energy loads, but is not
applicable to hermetically sealed switches.
(1) Typical logic load devices have a
voltage of 0.5 volts to 28 volts and a continuous current of less than 0.5 amps. A suitable
method of rating switches for use on logic load
devices is specified in ANSI/EIA 5200000.
(General specification for special use electromechanical switches of certified quality.)
[TABLE 11-5] Selection of contact material.
NOTES:
1. If sulfide, moisture, or any form of contamination is
present, a sealed switch should be used. The degree
of sealing required (environmental or hermetic) is dependent upon the environment in which the switch is
intended to be operated.
2. If particle contamination in any form is likely to reach
the contacts, bifurcated contacts should be used.
3. Low-voltage high-current loads are difficult to predict
and may result in a combined tendency of noncontact,
sticking, and material transfer.
4. High-voltage high-current applications may require the
use of Silver Nickel contacts.
(2) Typical low-level load devices have
a voltage of less than 0.5 volts and a continuous current of less than 0.5 amps. A suitable
method of rating switches for use on logic load
devices is specified in ANSI/EIA 5200000.
h. Shock and Vibration.
(1) Electromechanical switches (toggle
switches) are most susceptible to shock and
vibration in the plane that is parallel to contact
motion. Under these conditions the switch
contacts may momentarily separate.
ANSI/EIA 5200000 specifies that contact
separations greater than 10 microseconds and
that closing of open contacts in excess of
1 microsecond are failures. Repeated contact
separations during high levels of vibration or
shock may cause excessive electrical degradation of the contacts. These separations can
also cause false signals to be registered by
electronic data processors without proper buffering.
(2) Although proximity switches do not
have moving parts, the reliability of the internal electronic parts of the switch may be reduced. Reliability and mean time betweenfailure (MTBF) calculations should reflect the
applicable environment. Note that the mounting of both the proximity sensor and its target
must be rigid enough to withstand shock or vibration to avoid creating false responses.
i. Electromagnetic/Radio Frequency Interference (EMI/RFI).
(1) DC operated electromechanical
switches are usually not susceptible to
EMI/RFI. Proximity switches are susceptible
to an EMI/RFI environment and must be
evaluated in the application. Twisting lead
wires, metal overbraids, lead wire routing, and
the design of the proximity switch can minimize susceptibility.
(2) The arcing of electromechanical
switch contacts generates short duration
EMI/RFI when controlling highly inductive
electrical loads. Twisting lead wires, metal
overbraids, and lead wire routing can reduce or
eliminate generation problems when dealing
with arcing loads. Proximity sensors generally
use a relatively low-energy electromagnetic
field to sense the target. Adequate spacing is
required to prevent interference between adjacent proximity sensors or other devices susceptible to EMI/RFI. Refer to manufacturer’s
instructions.
b. Temperature.
(1) Electromechanical switches can
withstand wide temperature ranges and rapid
gradient shifts without damage. Most aircraft
°C °C
switches operate between -55 and 85
°C °C
with designs available from -185 to 260
or more. Higher temperatures require more
exotic materials, which can increase costs and
limit life. It should be noted that o-ring seals
and elastomer boot seals tend to stiffen in extreme cold. This can increase operating forces
and reduce release forces or stop the switch
from releasing.
(2) Proximity sensors are normally de-
°C
signed for environments from -55 to
°C.
125 During temperature excursions, the
operating and release points may shift from
5 percent to 10 percent. Reliability of the
proximity sensor will typically be highest at
room temperature. The reliability and MTBF
estimates should be reduced for use under high
temperatures or high thermal gradients.
c. Sealing.
NOTE: The materials used for sealing
(o-rings, potting materials, etc.)
should be compatible with any aircraft fluids to which the switch may be
exposed.
(1) Electromechanical switches range in
sealing from partially sealed to hermetically
sealed. Use a sealed switch when the switch
will be exposed to a dirty environment during
storage, assembly, or operation. Use a higher
level of sealing when the switch will not have
an arcing load to self-clean the contacts. Lowenergy loads tend to be more susceptible to
contamination.
(2) Proximity switches for aircraft applications typically have a metal face and potting material surrounding any electronics and
lead wire exits. The potting material should be
compatible with the fluids the switch will be
exposed to in the environment. The plastic
sensing face of some proximity switches may
be subject to absorption of water that may
cause the operating point to shift should be
protected.
d. Switch Installation. Hazardous errors
in switch operation may be avoided by logical
and consistent installation. “On-off”
two-position switches should be mounted so
that the “on” position is reached by an upward
or forward movement of the toggle. When the
switch controls movable aircraft elements,
such as landing gear or flaps, the toggle should
move in the same direction as the desired motion. Inadvertent operation of switches can be
prevented by mounting suitable guards over
the switches.
