AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 8: WIRING INSTALLATION INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS

11-97. WIRING REPLACEMENT. Wiring must be replaced with equivalent wire (see
paragraph 11-78) when found to have any of
the following defects:
a. Wiring that has been subjected to
chafing or fraying, that has been severely damaged, or that primary insulation is suspected of
being penetrated.
b. Wiring on which the outer insulation is
brittle to the point that slight flexing causes it
to crack.
c. Wiring having weather-cracked outer
insulation.
d. Wiring that is known to have been exposed to electrolyte or on which the insulation
appears to be, or is suspected of being, in an
initial stage of deterioration due to the effects
of electrolyte.
e. Check wiring that shows evidence of
overheating (even if only to a minor degree)
for the cause of the overheating.
f. Wiring on which the insulation has become saturated with engine oil, hydraulic fluid,
or another lubricant.
g. Wiring that bears evidence of having
been crushed or severely kinked.
h. Shielded wiring on which the metallic
shield is frayed and/or corroded. Cleaning
agents or preservatives should not be used to
minimize the effects of corrosion or deterioration of wire shields.
i. Wiring showing evidence of breaks,
cracks, dirt, or moisture in the plastic sleeves
placed over wire splices or terminal lugs.
j. Sections of wire in which splices occur
at less than 10-foot intervals, unless specifically authorized, due to parallel connections,
locations, or inaccessibility.
k. When replacing wiring or coaxial cables, identify them properly at both equipment
and power source ends.
l. Wire substitution-In the repair and
modification of existing aircraft, when a replacement wire is required, the maintenance
manual for that aircraft should first be reviewed to determine if the original aircraft
manufacturer (OAM) has approved any substitution. If not, then the OAM should be
contacted for an acceptable replacement.
m. Testing of the electrical and chemical integrity of the insulation of sample wires
taken from areas of the aircraft that have experienced wiring problems in the past, can be
used to supplement visual examination of the
wire. The test for chemical integrity should be
specific for the degradation mode of the insulation. If the samples fail either the electrical
or chemical integrity tests, then the wiring in
the area surrounding the sampling area is a
candidate for replacement.
