AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 6: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL WIRE SELECTION

11-77. AIRCRAFT WIRE MATERIALS.
Only wire, specifically designed for airborne
use, must be installed in aircraft.
a. Authentic Aircraft Wire. Most aircraft wire designs are to specifications that require manufacturers to pass rigorous testing of
wires before being added to a Qualified Products List (QPL) and being permitted to produce
the wire. Aircraft manufacturers who maintain
their own wire specifications invariably exercise close control on their approved
sources. Such military or original equipment
manufacturer (OEM) wire used on aircraft
should only have originated from these defined
wire mills. Aircraft wire from other unauthorized firms, and fraudulently marked with
the specified identification, must be regarded
as “unapproved wire,” and usually will be of
inferior quality with little or no process control
testing. Efforts must be taken to ensure obtaining authentic, fully tested aircraft wire.
b. Plating. Bare copper develops a surface oxide coating at a rate dependent on temperature. This oxide film is a poor conductor
of electricity and inhibits determination of
wire. Therefore, all aircraft wiring has a coating of tin, silver, or nickel, that have far slower
oxidation rates.
(1) Tin coated copper is a very common
plating material. Its ability to be successfully
soldered without highly active fluxes diminishes rapidly with time after manufacture. It
can be used up to the limiting temperature of
150 °C.
(2) Silver-coated wire is used where
temperatures do not exceed 200 °C (392 °F).
(3) Nickel coated wire retains its properties beyond 260 °C, but most aircraft wire
using such coated strands have insulation systems that cannot exceed that temperature on
long-term exposure. Soldered terminations of
nickel-plated conductor require the use of different solder sleeves or flux than those used
with tin or silver-plated conductor.
c. Conductor Stranding. Because of
flight vibration and flexing, conductor round
wire should be stranded to minimize fatigue
breakage.
d. Wire Construction Versus Application. The most important consideration in the
selection of aircraft wire is properly matching
the wire’s construction to the application environment. Wire construction that is suitable for
the most severe environmental condition to be
encountered should be selected. Wires are
typically categorized as being suitable for either “open wiring” or “protected wiring” applications. MIL-W-5088L, replaced by
AS50881A, wiring aerospace vehicle, Appendix A table A-I lists wires considered to have
sufficient abrasion and cut-through resistance
to be suitable for open-harness construction.
MIL-W-5088L, replaced by AS50881A, wiring
aerospace vehicle, Appendix A table A-II lists
wires for protected applications. These wires
are not recommended for aircraft interconnection wiring unless the subject harness is covered throughout its length by a protective
jacket. The wire temperature rating is typically
a measure of the insulation’s ability to withstand the combination of ambient temperature
and current related conductor temperature rise.
e. Insulation. There are many insulation
materials and combinations used on aircraft
electrical wire. Characteristics should be chosen based on environment; such as abrasion resistance, arc resistance, corrosion resistance,
cut-through strength, dielectric strength, flame
resistant, mechanical strength, smoke emission, fluid resistance, and heat distortion. An
explanation of many of the abbreviations is
identified in the glossary.
