AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 14: TERMINAL REPAIRS

11-176. STUDS AND INSULATORS. The
following recommendations concerning studs
also apply to other feed-through conductors.
a. Current Carrying Stud Resistance.
Due to heat loss arising from wire-to-lug and
lug-to-stud voltage drop, the resistance per unit
length of a current carrying stud should not be
greater than that of the wire.
b. Size of Studs. In designing the stud for
a feed-through connection, attention should be
given to the higher resistance of brass, as compared to copper. A suggested method of determining the size is to use a current density in
the stud equivalent to that of the wire, compensating for the difference of resistance of the
metals. Consideration should also be given to
mechanical strength.
c. Support for Studs. The main stud
support in the feed-through insulation should
be independent of the attachment of the lugs to
the stud. Therefore, loosening of the insulation support of the stud will not affect the
electric contact efficiency. In other words, the
contact pressure on the wire lugs should not in
any way be affected by the loosening of the
stud in the insulator.
d. Support of Wire at Studs. Unless
some other positive locking action is provided,
the lug or wire should be supported next to the
stud to prevent loosening the connection with a
side pull on the wire. Torque recommendations for attaching electrical wiring devices to
terminal boards or blocks, studs, posts, etc.,
are normally found in the manufacturer’s
maintenance instruction manual.
e. Feed-Through Insulator and Stud
Design. Feed-through insulator design should
be such as to prevent a loose insulator from
failing to provide circuit isolation. It should
not be able to move from between the stud and
the structure, thus allowing the two to come
into contact. The assembly should be so designed that it is impossible to inadvertently
misassemble the parts so that faults will result.
Also, it is desirable to provide means to prevent the feed-through stud from turning while
tightening the connection.
