AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 6: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL WIRE SELECTION

11-76. GENERAL. Aircraft service imposes severe environmental condition on electrical wire. To ensure satisfactory service, inspect wire annually for abrasions, defective insulation, condition of terminations, and potential corrosion. Grounding connections for
power, distribution equipment, and electromagnetic shielding must be given particular
attention to ensure that electrical bonding resistance has not been significantly increased by
the loosening of connections or corrosion.
a. Wire Size. Wires must have sufficient
mechanical strength to allow for service conditions. Do not exceed allowable voltage drop
levels. Ensure that the wires are protected by
system circuit protection devices, and that they
meet circuit current carrying requirements. If
it is desirable to use wire sizes smaller
than #20, particular attention should be given
to the mechanical strength and installation
handling of these wires, e.g. vibration, flexing,
and termination. When used in interconnecting airframe application, #24 gauge wire must
be made of high strength alloy.
b. Installation Precautions for Small
Wires. As a general practice, wires smaller
than size #20 must be provided with additional
clamps, grouped with at least three other wires,
and have additional support at terminations,
such as connector grommets, strain-relief
clamps, shrinkable sleeving, or telescoping
bushings. They should not be used in applications where they will be subjected to excessive
vibration, repeated bending, or frequent disconnection from screw terminations.
c. Identification. All wire used on aircraft must have its type identification imprinted along its length. It is common practice
to follow this part number with the five
digit/letter Commercial and Government Entity (C.A.G.E). code identifying the wire
manufacturer. Existing installed wire that
needs replacement can thereby be identified as
to its performance capabilities, and the inadvertent use of a lower performance and unsuitable replacement wire avoided.
(1) In addition to the type identification
imprinted by the original wire manufacturer,
aircraft wire also contains its unique circuit
identification coding that is put on at the time
of harness assembly. The traditional “Hot
Stamp” method has not been totally satisfactory in recent years when used on modern, ultra-thin-walled installations. Fracture of the
insulation wall and penetration to the conductor of these materials by the stamping dies
have occurred. Later in service, when these
openings have been wetted by various fluids,
serious arcing and surface tracking have damaged wire bundles.
(2) Extreme care must be taken during
circuit identification by a hot stamp machine
on wire with a 10 mil wall or thinner. Alternative identification methods, such as “Laser
Printing” and “Ink Jet,” are coming into increasing use by the industry. When such modern equipment is not available, the use of
stamped identification sleeving should be considered on thin-walled wire, especially when
insulation wall thickness falls below 10 mils.
