AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 17: CONNECTORS

11-235. INSTALLATION.
a. Redundancy. Wires that perform the
same function in redundant systems must be
routed through separate connectors. On systems critical to flight safety, system operation
wiring should be routed through separate connectors from the wiring used for system failure
warning. It is also good practice to route a
system’s indication wiring in separate connectors from its failure warning circuits to the
extent practicable. These steps can reduce an
aircraft’s susceptibility to incidents that might
result from connector failures.
b. Adjacent Locations. Mating of adjacent connectors should not be possible. In order to ensure this, adjacent connector pairs
must be different in shell size, coupling means,
insert arrangement, or keying arrangement.
When such means are impractical, wires
should be routed and clamped so that incorrectly mated pairs cannot reach each other.
Reliance on markings or color stripes is not
recommended as they are likely to deteriorate
with age.
c. Sealing. Connectors must be of a type
that exclude moisture entry through the use of
peripheral and interfacial seal that are compressed when the connector is mated. Moisture entry through the rear of the connector
must be avoided by correctly matching the
wire’s outside diameter with the connector’s
rear grommet sealing range. It is recommended that no more than one wire be terminated in any crimp style contact. The use of
heat-shrinkable tubing to build up the wire diameter, or the application of potting to the wire
entry area as additional means of providing a
rear compatibility with the rear grommet is
recommended. These extra means have inherent penalties and should be considered only
where other means cannot be used. Unwired
spare contacts should have a correctly sized
plastic plug installed. (See section 19.)
d. Drainage. Connectors must be installed in a manner which ensures that moisture and fluids will drain out of and not into
the connector when unmated. Wiring must be
routed so that moisture accumulated on the
bundle will drain away from connectors.
When connectors must be mounted in a vertical position, as through a shelf or floor, the
connectors must be potted or environmentally
sealed. In this situation it is better to have the
receptacle faced downward so that it will be
less susceptible to collecting moisture when
unmated.
e. Wire Support. A rear accessory backshell must be used on connectors that are not
enclosed. Connectors having very small size
wiring, or are subject to frequent maintenance
activity, or located in high-vibration areas
must be provided with a strain-relief-type
backshell. The wire bundle should be protected from mechanical damage with suitable
cushion material where it is secured by the
clamp. Connectors that are potted or have
molded rear adapters do not normally use a
separate strain relief accessory. Strain relief
clamps should not impart tension on wires
between the clamp and contact.
f. Slack. Sufficient wire length must be
provided at connectors to ensure a proper drip
loop and that there is no strain on termination
after a complete replacement of the connector
and its contacts.
g. Identification. Each connector should
have a reference identification that is legible
throughout the expected life of the aircraft.
