AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 2: STORAGE BATTERIES

11-19. BATTERY MAINTENANCE.
Battery inspection and maintenance procedures
vary with the type of chemical technology and
the type of physical construction. Always follow the battery manufacturer’s approved procedures. Battery performance at any time in a
given application will depend upon the battery’s age, state of health, state of charge, and
mechanical integrity.
a. Age. To determine the life and age of
the battery, record the install date of the battery
on the battery. During normal battery maintenance, battery age must be documented either
in the aircraft maintenance log or in the shop
maintenance log.
b. State of Health. Lead-acid battery
state of health may be determined by duration
of service interval (in the case of vented batteries), by environmental factors (such as excessive heat or cold), and by observed electrolyte leakage (as evidenced by corrosion of
wiring and connectors or accumulation of
powdered salts). If the battery needs to be refilled often, with no evidence of external leakage, this may indicate a poor state of the battery, the battery charging system, or an over
charge condition.
(1) Use a hydrometer to determine the
specific gravity of the battery electrolyte,
which is the weight of the electrolyte compared to the weight of pure water.
(2) Take care to ensure the electrolyte is
returned to the cell from which it was extracted. When a specific gravity difference
of 0.050 or more exists between cells of a battery, the battery is approaching the end of its
useful life and replacement should be considered. Electrolyte level may be adjusted by the
addition of distilled water.
c. State of Charge. Battery state of
charge will be determined by the cumulative
effect of charging and discharging the battery.
In a normal electrical charging system the battery’s generator or alternator restores a battery
to full charge during a flight of one hour to
ninety minutes.
d. Mechanical Integrity. Proper mechanical integrity involves the absence of any
physical damage as well as assurance that
hardware is correctly installed and the battery
is properly connected. Battery and battery
compartment venting system tubes, nipples
and attachments, when required, provide a
means of avoiding the potential buildup of explosive gases, and should be checked periodically to ensure that they are securely connected
and oriented in accordance with the maintenance manual’s installation procedures. Always follow procedures approved for the specific aircraft and battery system to ensure that
the battery system is capable of delivering
specified performance.
e. Battery and Charger Characteristics.
The following information is provided to acquaint the user with characteristics of the more
common aircraft battery and battery charger
types. Products may vary from these descriptions due to different applications of available
technology. Consult the manufacturer for specific performance data.
NOTE: Under no circumstances connect a lead-acid battery to a charger,
unless properly serviced.
(1) Lead-acid vented batteries have a
two volt nominal cell voltage. Batteries are
constructed so that individual cells cannot be
removed. Occasional addition of water is required to replace water loss due to overcharging in normal service. Batteries that become
fully discharged may not accept recharge.
(2) Lead-acid sealed batteries are similar in most respects to lead-acid vented batteries, but do not require the addition of water.
(3) The lead-acid battery is economical
and has extensive application, but is heavier
than an equivalent performance battery of another type. The battery is capable of a high
rate of discharge and low temperature performance. However, maintaining a high rate
of discharge for a period of time usually warps
the cell plates, shorting out the battery. Its
electrolyte has a moderate specific gravity, and
state of charge can be checked with a hydrometer.
(4) Do not use high amperage automotive battery chargers to charge aircraft
batteries.
(5) NiCad vented batteries have a
1.2 volt nominal cell voltage. Occasional addition of distilled water is required to replace
water loss due to overcharging in normal
service. Cause of failure is usually shorting or
weakening of a cell. After replacing the bad
cell with a good cell, the battery’s life can be
extended for five or more years. Full discharge is not harmful to this type of battery.
(6) NiCad sealed batteries are similar in
most respects to NiCad vented batteries, but do
not normally require the addition of water.
Fully discharging the battery (to zero volts)
may cause irreversible damage to one or more
cells, leading to eventual battery failure due to
low capacity.
(7) The state of charge of a NiCad battery cannot be determined by measuring the
specific gravity of the potassium hydroxide
electrolyte. The electrolyte specific gravity
does not change with the state of charge. The
only accurate way to determine the state of
charge of a NiCad battery is by a measured
discharge with a NiCad battery charger and
following the manufacturer’s instructions.
After the battery has been fully charged and
allowed to stand for at least two hours, the
fluid level may be adjusted, if necessary, using
distilled or demineralized water. Because the
fluid level varies with the state of charge, water should never be added while the battery is
installed in the aircraft. Overfilling the battery
will result in electrolyte spewage during
charging. This will cause corrosive effects on
the cell links, self-discharge of the battery, dilution of the electrolyte density, possible
blockage of the cell vents, and eventual cell
rupture.
(8) Lead-acid batteries are usually
charged by regulated DC voltage sources. This
allows maximum accumulation of charge in
the early part of recharging.
(9) Constant-current battery chargers
are usually provided for NiCad batteries because the NiCad cell voltage has a negative
temperature coefficient. With a constantvoltage charging source, a NiCad battery
having a shorted cell might overheat due to excessive overcharge and undergo a thermal runaway, destroying the battery and creating a
possible safety hazard to the aircraft.
DEFINITION: Thermal runaway can
result in a chemical fire and/or explosion of the NiCad battery under recharge by a constant-voltage source,
and is due to cyclical, ever-increasing
temperature and charging current.
One or more shorted cells or an existing high temperature and low charge
can produce the cyclical sequence of
events: (1) excessive current,
(2) increased temperature,
(3) decreased cell(s) resistance,
(4) further increased current, and
(5) further increased temperature.
This will not become a self-sustaining
thermal-chemical action if the constant-voltage charging source is removed before the battery temperature
°°°°F.
is in excess of 160
(10) Pulsed-current battery chargers are
sometimes provided for NiCad batteries.
CAUTION: It is important to use the
proper charging procedures for batteries under test and maintenance.
These charging regimes for reconditioning and charging cycles are defined by the aircraft manufacturer
and should be closely followed.
f. Shop-Level Maintenance Procedures.
Shop procedures must follow the manufacturer’s recommendations. Careful examination
of sealed batteries and proper reconditioning of
vented batteries will ensure the longest possible service life.
g. Aircraft Battery Inspection.
(1) Inspect battery sump jar and lines
for condition and security.
(2) Inspect battery terminals and quickdisconnect plugs and pins for evidence of corrosion, pitting, arcing, and burns. Clean as required.
(3) Inspect battery drain and vent lines
for restriction, deterioration, and security.
(4) Routine pre-flight and post-flight
inspection procedures should include observation for evidence of physical damage, loose
connections, and electrolyte loss.
