AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 14: TERMINAL REPAIRS

11-174. GENERAL. Terminals are attached
to the ends of electrical wires to facilitate connection of the wires to terminal strips or items
of equipment. The tensile strength of the wireto-terminal joint should be at least equivalent
to the tensile strength of the wire itself, and its
resistance negligible relative to the normal resistance of the wire.
a. Selection of Wire Terminals. The
following should be considered in the selection
of wire terminals.
(1) Current rating.
(2) Wire size (gauge) and insulation
diameter.
(3) Conductor material compatibility.
(4) Stud size.
(5) Insulation material compatibility.
(6) Application environment.
(7) Solder/solderless.
Pre-insulated crimp-type ring-tongue terminals
are preferred. The strength, size, and supporting means of studs and binding posts, as well
as the wire size, should be considered when
determining the number of terminals to be attached to any one post. In high-temperature
applications, the terminal temperature rating
must be greater than the ambient temperature
plus current related temperature rise. Use of
nickel-plated terminals and of uninsulated terminals with high-temperature insulating
sleeves should be considered. Terminal blocks
should be provided with adequate electrical
clearance or insulation strips between mounting hardware and conductive parts.
b. Terminal Strips. Wires are usually
joined at terminal strips. A terminal strip fitted with barriers should be used to prevent the
terminals on adjacent studs from contacting
each other. Studs should be anchored against
rotation. When more than four terminals are to
be connected together, a small metal bus
should be mounted across two or more adjacent studs. In all cases, the current should be
carried by the terminal contact surfaces and not
by the stud itself. Defective studs should be
replaced with studs of the same size and material since terminal strip studs of the smaller
sizes may shear due to overtightening the nut.
The replacement stud should be securely
mounted in the terminal strip and the terminal
securing nut should be tight. Terminal strips
should be mounted in such a manner that loose
metallic objects cannot fall across the terminals or studs. It is good practice to provide at
least one spare stud for future circuit expansion or in case a stud is broken. Terminal strips
that provide connection of radio and electronic
systems to the aircraft electrical system should
be inspected for loose connections, metallic
objects that may have fallen across the terminal strip, dirt and grease accumulation, etc.
These type conditions can cause arcing which
may result in a fire, or system failures.
c. Terminal Lugs. Wire terminal lugs
should be used to connect wiring to terminal
block studs or equipment terminal studs. No
more than four terminal lugs or three terminal
lugs and a bus bar should be connected to any
one stud. Total number of terminal lugs per
stud includes a common bus bar joining adjacent studs. Four terminal lugs plus a common
bus bar thus are not permitted on one stud.
Terminal lugs should be selected with a stud
hole diameter that matches the diameter of the
stud. However, when the terminal lugs attached to a stud vary in diameter, the greatest
diameter should be placed on the bottom and
the smallest diameter on top. Tightening terminal connections should not deform the terminal lugs or the studs. Terminal lugs should
be so positioned that bending of the terminal
lug is not required to remove the fastening
screw or nut, and movement of the terminal
lugs will tend to tighten the connection.
d. Copper Terminal Lugs. Solderless
crimp style, copper wire, terminal lugs should
be used and conform to MIL-T-7928. Spacers
or washers should not be used between the
tongues of terminal lugs.
e. Aluminum Terminal Lugs. The aluminum terminal lugs conforming to
MIL-T-7099 (MS-25435, MS-25436,
MS-25437, and MS-25438) should be crimped
to aluminum wire only. The tongue of the
aluminum terminal lugs or the total number of
tongues of aluminum terminal lugs when
stacked, should be sandwiched between two
MS-25440 flat washers when terminated on
terminal studs. Spacers or washers should not
be used between the tongues of terminal lugs.
Special attention should be given to aluminum
wire and cable installations to guard against
conditions that would result in excessive voltage drop and high resistance at junctions that
may ultimately lead to failure of the junction.
Examples of such conditions are improper installation of terminals and washers, improper
torsion (“torquing” of nuts), and inadequate
terminal contact areas.
f. Class 2 Terminal Lugs. The Class 2
terminal lugs conforming to MIL-T-7928 may
be used for installation, provided that in such
installations, Class 1 terminal lugs are adequate for replacement without rework of installation or terminal lugs. Class 2 terminal
lugs should be the insulated type, unless the
°C.
conductor temperature exceeds 105 In that
case uninsulated terminal lugs should be used.
Parts’ lists should indicate the appropriate
Class 1 terminal lugs to be used for service replacement of any Class 2 terminal lugs installed.
g. Termination of Shielded Wire. For
termination of shielded wire refer to
MIL-DTL-27500.
