AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 3: INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION

11-37. JUNCTION BOX CONSTRUCTION. Replacement junction boxes should be
fabricated using the same material as the original or from a fire-resistant, nonabsorbent material, such as aluminum, or an acceptable plastic
material. Where fire-proofing is necessary, a
stainless steel junction box is recommended.
Rigid construction will prevent “oil-canning”
of the box sides that could result in internal
short circuits. In all cases, drain holes should
be provided in the lowest portion of the box.
Cases of electrical power equipment must be
insulated from metallic structure to avoid
ground fault related fires. (See paragraph 11-7.)
a. Internal Arrangement. The junction
box arrangement should permit easy access to
any installed items of equipment, terminals,
and wires. Where marginal clearances are unavoidable, an insulating material should be inserted between current carrying parts and any
grounded surface. It is not good practice to
mount equipment on the covers or doors of
junction boxes, since inspection for internal
clearance is impossible when the door or cover
is in the closed position.
b. Installation. Junction boxes should be
securely mounted to the aircraft structure in
such a manner that the contents are readily accessible for inspection. When possible, the
open side should face downward or at an angle
so that loose metallic objects, such as washers
or nuts, will tend to fall out of the junction box
rather than wedge between terminals.
c. Wiring. Junction box layouts should
take into consideration the necessity for adequate wiring space and possible future additions. Electrical wire bundles should be laced
or clamped inside the box so that cables do not
touch other components, prevent ready access,
or obscure markings or labels. Cables at entrance openings should be protected against
chafing by using grommets or other suitable
means.
11-38.11-46.
[RESERVED.]

SECTION 4. INSPECTION OF CIRCUIT-PROTECTION
