AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 15: GROUNDING AND BONDING

11-193. LIGHTNING PROTECTION
BONDING. Electrical bonding is frequently
required for lightning protection of aircraft and
systems, especially to facilitate safe conduction of lightning currents through the airframe.
Most of this bonding is achieved through normal airframe riveted or bolted joints but some
externally mounted parts, such as control surfaces, engine nacelles, and antennas, may require additional bonding provisions. Generally, the adequacy of lightning current bonds
depends on materials, cross-sections, physical
configurations, tightness, and surface finishes.
Care should be taken to minimize structural resistance, so as to control structural voltage
rises to levels compatible with system protection design. This may require that metal surfaces be added to composite structures, or that
tinned copper overbraid, conduits, or cable
trays be provided for interconnecting wire harnesses within composite airframes. Also care
must be taken to prevent hazardous lightning
currents from entering the airframe via flight
control cables, push rods, or other conducting
objects that extend to airframe extremities.
This may require that these conductors be
electrically bonded to the airframe, or that
electrical insulators be used to interrupt lightning currents. For additional information on
lightning protection measures, refer to
DOT/FAA/CT-89-22. Report DOT/FAA/
CT 86/8, April 1987, Determination of Electrical Properties of Bonding and Fastening Techniques may provide additional information for
composite materials.
a. Control Surface Lightning Protection
Bonding. Control surface bonding is intended
to prevent the burning of hinges on a surface
that receives a lightning strike; thus causing
possible loss of control. To accomplish this
bonding, control surfaces and flaps should
have at least one 6500 circular mil area copper
(e.g. 7 by 37 AWG size 36 strands) jumper
across each hinge. In any case, not less than
two 6500 circular mil jumpers should be used
on each control surface. The installation location of these jumpers should be carefully chosen to provide a low-impedance shunt for
lightning current across the hinge to the structure. When jumpers may be subjected to arcing, substantially larger wire sizes of
40,000 circular mils or a larger cross section
are required to provide protection against multiple strikes. Sharp bends and loops in such
jumpers can create susceptibility to breakage
when subjected to the inductive forces created
by lightning current, and should be avoided.
b. Control Cable Lightning Protection
Bonding. To prevent damage to the control
system or injury to flight personnel due to
lightning strike, cables and levers coming from
each control surface should be protected by
one or more bonding jumpers located as close
to the control surface as possible. Metal pulleys are considered a satisfactory ground for
control cables.
