AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 11: AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS  Section 3: INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION

11-35. ACCEPTABLE MEANS OF
CONTROLLING OR MONITORING THE
ELECTRICAL LOAD.
a. Output Rating. The generator or alternator output ratings and limits prescribed by
the manufacturer must be checked against the
electrical loads that can be imposed on the affected generator or alternator by installed
equipment. When electrical load calculations
show that the total continuous electrical load
can exceed 80 percent output load limits of the
generator or alternator, and where special placards or monitoring devices are not installed,
the electrical load must be reduced or the generating capacity of the charging system must
be increased. (This is strictly a “rule of thumb”
method and should not be confused with an
electrical load analysis, which is a complete
and accurate analysis, which is a complete and
accurate of the composite aircraft power
sources and all electrical loads) When a storage battery is part of the electrical power system, the battery will be continuously charged
in flight.
b. The use of placards is recommended
to inform the pilot and/or crew members of the
combination(s) of loads that may be connected
to each power source. Warning lights can be
installed that will be triggered if the battery
bus voltage drops below 13 volts on a 14-volt
system or 26 volts on a 28-volt system.
c. For installations where the ammeter is
in the battery lead, and the regulator system
limits the maximum current that the generator
or alternator can deliver, a voltmeter can be installed on the system bus. As long as the ammeter never reads “discharge” (except for short
intermittent loads such as operating the gear
and flaps) and the voltmeter remains at “system voltage,” the generator or alternator will
not be overloaded.
d. In installations where the ammeter is
in the generator or alternator lead and the
regulator system does not limit the maximum
current that the generator or alternator can deliver, the ammeter can be redlined at
100 percent of the generator or alternator rating. If the ammeter reading is never allowed
to exceed the red line, except for short intermittent loads, the generator or alternator will
not be overloaded.
e. Where the use of placards or monitoring devices is not practical or desired, and
where assurance is needed that the battery will
be charged in flight, the total continuous connected electrical load should be held to approximately 80 percent of the total generator
output capacity. When more than one generator is used in parallel, the total rated output is
the combined output of the installed generators.
f. When two or more generators and alternators are operated in parallel and the total
connected system load can exceed the rated
output of a single generator, a method should
be provided for quickly coping with a sudden
overload that can be caused by generator or
engine failure. A quick load reduction system
or procedure should be identified whereby the
total load can be reduced by the pilot to a
quantity within the rated capacity of the remaining operable generator or generators.
