AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 12: AIRCRAFT AVIONICS SYSTEMS  Section 2: GROUND OPERATIONAL CHECKS FOR AVIONICS EQUIPMENT (ELECTRICAL)

12-9. INSPECTION OF AVIONICS
SYSTEMS.
a. The inspection shall include the following:
(1) Inspect the condition and security of
equipment including the proper security of
wiring bundles.
(2) Check for indications of overheating
of the equipment and associated wiring.
(3) Check for poor electrical bonding.
The bonding requirements are specified by
equipment manufacturers. Installation cabling
should be kept as short as possible, except for
antenna cables which are usually precut or
have a specific length called out at installation.
Proper bonding on the order of 0.003 ohms is
very important to the performance of avionics
equipment.
CHECKS FOR AVIONICS EQUIPMENT
(4) Check to assure that the radios and
instruments are secured to the instrument
panel.
(5) Check that all avionics are free of
dust, dirt, lint, or any other airborne contaminates. If there is a forced air cooling system, it
must be inspected for proper operation.
Equipment ventilation openings must not be
obstructed.
(6) Check the microphone headset
plugs and connectors and all switches and
controls for condition and operation. Check
all avionics instruments for placards. Check
lightening, annunciator lights, and cockpit interphone for proper operation.
(7) The circuit breaker panel must be
inspected for the presence of placarding for
each circuit breaker installed.
(8) Check the electrical circuit switches,
especially the spring-load type for proper operation. An internal failure in this type of
switch may allow the switch to remain closed
even though the toggle or button returns to the
OFF position. During inspection, attention
must be given to the possibility that improper
switch substitution may have been made.
b. Inspect antennas for:
(1) broken or missing antenna
insulators
(2) lead through insulators
(3) springs
(4) safety wires
(5) cracked antenna housing
(6) missing or poor sealant at base of
antenna
(7) correct installation
(8) signs of corrosion, and
(9) the condition of paint/bonding and
grounding.
(10) Check the bonding of each antenna
from mounting base to the aircraft skin. Tolerance: .1 ohm, maximum.
(a) Test Equipment:
1 1502B Metallic Time Domain
Reflectometer or equivalent.
2 Thruline Wattmeter.
(b) Perform the antenna evaluation
check using the domain reflectometer to determine the condition of the antenna and coax
cables. Refer to manufacturer’s maintenance
procedures.
(c) Use thruline wattmeter as needed
for addition evaluation. Refer to manufacturer’s maintenance procedures. Check for the
following:
1 Resistance.
2 Shorts.
3 Opens.
c. Inspect the static dischargers/wicks
for:
(1) physical security of mounting attachments, wear or abrasion of wicks, missing
wicks, etc.,
(2) assurance that one inch of the inner
braid of flexible vinyl cover wicks extends beyond the vinyl covering,
(3) assurance that all dischargers are
present and securely mounted to their base,
(4) assurance that all bases are securely
bonded to skin of aircraft in order to prevent
the existence in voltage level differences between two surfaces,
(5) signs of excessive erosion or deterioration of discharger tip,
(6) lighting damage as evidenced by
pitting of the metal base, and
(7) megohm value of static wick itself
as per manufacturer’s instructions. It should
not be open.
d. Subsequent inspection must be made
after a maintenance action on a transponder.
Refer to Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 91, sections 91.411
and 91.413.
e. Inspection of the emergency locator
transmitter operation, condition and date of
the battery.
f. Perform a function check of the radio
by transmitting a request for a radio check.
Perform a function check on navigation
equipment by moving the omni bearing selection (OBS) and noting the needle swing and
the TO/FROM flag movement.
