AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 12: AIRCRAFT AVIONICS SYSTEMS  Section 2: GROUND OPERATIONAL CHECKS FOR AVIONICS EQUIPMENT (ELECTRICAL)

12-14. INSTRUMENT LANDING
SYSTEMS (ILS). The ILS consist of several
components, such as the localizer, glide slope,
marker beacon, radio altimeter, and DME.
Localizer and glide slope receivers and marker
beacons will be discussed in this section.
a. Localizer receiver operates on one of
40 ILS channels within the frequency range of
108.10 to 111.95 MHz (odd tens). These signals provide course guidance to the pilot to the
runway centerline through the lateral displacement of the VOR/localizer (LOC) deviation indicator. The ground transmitter is
sighted at the far end of the runway and provides a valid signal from a distance of 18 NM
from the transmitter. The indication gives a
full fly left/right deviation of 700 feet at the
runway threshold. Identification of the transmitter is in International Morse Code and consists of a three letter identifier preceded by the
Morse Code letter I (two dots). The localizer
function is usually integral with the VOR system, and when maintenance is performed on
the VOR unit, the localizer is also included.
The accuracy of the system can be effectively
evaluated through normal flight operations if
evaluated during visual meteorological conditions. Any determination of airworthiness after reinstallation before instrument flight must
be accomplished with ground test equipment.
b. The glide slope receiver operates on
one of 40 channels within the frequency range
329.15 MHz, to 335.00 MHz. The glide slope
transmitter is located between 750 feet and
1250 feet from the approach end of the runway
and offset 250 to 650 feet. In the absence of
questionable performance, periodic functional
flight checks of the glide slope system would
be an acceptable way to ensure continued system performance. The functional flight test
must be conducted under visual flight rules
(VFR) conditions. A failed or misleading
system must be serviced by an appropriatelyrated repair station. Ground test equipment
can be used to verify glide slope operation.
c. Localizer/Glide Slope (LOC/GS) may
have self test function, otherwise the proper
ground test equipment must be used. Refer to
manufacturer’s or aircraft instruction manual.
