AC 43.13-1B  Chapter 12: AIRCRAFT AVIONICS SYSTEMS  Section 3: GROUND OPERATIONAL CHECKS FOR AVIONICS EQUIPMENT

12-38. PNEUMATIC GYROS.
a. Venturi Systems. The early gyro instruments were all operated by air flowing out
of a jet over buckets cut into the periphery of
the gyro rotor. A venturi was mounted on the
outside of the aircraft to produce a low pressure, or vacuum, which evacuated the instrument case, and air flowed into the instrument
through a paper filter and then through a nozzle onto the rotor.
(1) Venturi systems have the advantage
of being extremely simple and requiring no
power from the engine, nor from any of the
other aircraft systems; but they do have the
disadvantage of being susceptible to ice, and
[FIG 12-1] Venturi system for providing airflow through
when they are most needed, they may become
unusable.
(2) There are two sizes of venturi tubes:
those which produce four inches of suction are
used to drive the attitude gyros, and smaller
tubes, which produce two inches of suction,
are used for the turn and slip indicator. Some
installations use two of the larger venturi tubes
connected in parallel to the two attitude gyros,
and the turn and slip indicator is connected to
one of these instruments with a needle valve
between them. A suction gage is temporarily
connected to the turn and slip indicator, and
the aircraft is flown so the needle valve can be
adjusted to the required suction at the instrument when the aircraft is operated at its cruise
speed. (See figure 12-1.)
gyro instruments.
b. Vacuum Pump Systems. In order to
overcome the major drawback of the venturi
tube, that is, its susceptibility to ice, aircraft
were equipped with engine driven vacuum
pumps and the gyro instruments were driven
by air pulled through the instrument by the
suction produced by these pumps. A suction
relief valve maintained the desired pressure
(usually about four inches of mercury) on the
attitude gyro instruments, and a needle valve
between one of the attitude indicators and the
turn and slip indicator restricted the airflow to
maintain the desired 2 inches of suction in its
case. Most of the early instruments used only
paper filters in each of the instrument cases,
but in some installations a central air filter was
used to remove contaminants from the cabin
air before it entered the instrument case.
(1) The early vacuum pumps were
vane-type pumps of what is called the wet
type-one with a cast iron housing and steel
vanes. Engine oil was metered into the pump
to provide sealing, lubrication, and cooling,
and then this oil, along with the air, was blown
through an oil separator where the oil collected
on baffles and was returned to the engine
crankcase. The air was then exhausted overboard. Aircraft equipped with rubber deicer
boots used this discharge air to inflate the
boots. But before it could be used, this air was
passed through a second stage of oil separation
and then to the distributor valve and finally to
the boots. (See figure 12-2.)
(2) The airflow through the instruments
is controlled by maintaining the suction in the
instrument case at the desired level with a suction relief valve mounted between the pump
and the instruments. This valve has a
spring-loaded poppet that offsets to allow
cabin air to enter the pump and maintain the
correct negative pressure inside the instrument
case.
(3) The more modern vacuum pumps
are of the dry type. These pumps use carbon
vanes and do not require any lubrication, as the
vanes provide their own lubrication as they
wear away at a carefully predetermined rate.
Other than the fact that they do not require an
oil separator, systems using dry air pumps are
quite similar to those using a wet pump. One
slight difference, however, is in the need for
keeping the inside of the pump perfectly clean.
Any solid particles drawn into the system
through the suction relief valve can damage
one of the carbon vanes, and this can lead to
destruction of the pump, as the particles broken off of one vane will damage all of the
other vanes. To prevent particles entering the
relief valve, its air inlet is covered with a filter,
and this must be cleaned or replaced at the interval recommended by the aircraft manufacturer.
c. Positive Pressure Systems. Above
about 18,000 feet there is not enough mass to
the air drawn through the instruments to provide sufficient rotor speed, and, to remedy this
problem, many aircraft that fly at high altitude
use positive pressure systems to drive the gyros. These systems use the same type of air
pump as is used for vacuum systems, but the
discharged air from the pump is filtered and
directed into the instrument case through the
same fitting that receives the filtered air when
the vacuum system is used. A filter is installed
on the inlet of the pump, and then, before the
air is directed into the instrument case, it is
again filtered. A pressure regulator is located
between the pump and the in-line filter to control the air pressure so only the correct amount
is directed into the instrument case.
System Filters. The life of an air-driven gyro
instrument is determined to a great extent by
the cleanliness of the air that flows over the
rotor. In vacuum systems, this air is taken
[FIG 12-2] Instrument vacuum system using a wet-type
from the cabin where there is usually a good
deal of dust and very often tobacco smoke.
Unless all of the solid contaminants are removed from the air before it enters the instrument, they will accumulate, usually in the rotor
bearings, and slow the rotor. This causes an
inaccurate indication of the instrument and
will definitely shorten its service life. Dry air
vacuum pump.
pumps are also subject to damage from ingested contaminants, and all of the filters in
the system must be replaced on the schedule
recommended by the aircraft manufacturer,
and more often if the aircraft is operated under
particularly dusty conditions, especially if the
occupants of the aircraft regularly smoke while
flying. (See figures 12-3 and 12-4.)
[FIG 12-3] Instrument vacuum system using a dry-type air
[FIG 12-4] Instrument pressure system using a dry-type air
12-39.12-50.
[RESERVED.]
pump.
pump.
SECTION 4. PITOT/STATIC SYSTEMS
